

--- START OF 2005.13168v1.pdf ---
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS
JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
Abstract. Westudytheminimumribbonlengthforimmersedplanarribbonknotsandlinks.
Our approach is to embed the space of such knots and links into a larger more tractable space
of disk diagrams. When length minimisers in disk diagram space are ribbon, then these solve
the ribbonlength problem. We also provide examples when minimisers in the space of disk
diagrams are not ribbon and state some conjectures. We compute the minimal ribbonlength
of some small knot and link diagrams and certain infinite families of link diagrams. Finally we
present a bound for the number of crossings for a diagram yielding the minimum ribbonlength
of a knot or link amongst all diagrams.
1. Introduction
A flat ribbon knot is an immersion of an annulus into the Euclidean plane such that the
core of the annulus corresponds to an immersed knot diagram. Flat ribbon links then are a
finite union of flat ribbon knots. We require that the combinatorics of the self-intersections of
the knot or link match that of the associated immersed annulus or annuli. The ribbonlength
problem aims to find the minimal ratio between the length of the core to the ribbon width over
all the planar realisations in a knot or link type. We normalise our ribbons so that the ribbon
width is 2 as can be done by a suitable homothety of the plane.
Kauffman [7] proposed a model for folded flat ribbon knots whose core is piecewise linear.
He gave conjectures about the ribbonlength of the trefoil and the figure-eight knot. Currently,
results in the literature provide bounds on the ribbonlength of flat folded ribbons knots for
certain families of torus knots. The ribbonlength problem remains open for general immersed
and folded ribbon knots. A good survey on flat folded ribbon knots can be found in [3]. Denne,
Sullivan and Wrinkle have reported to be working on the same problem considered here [4].
A similar scenario occurs for the ropelength problem, the 3-dimensional analog of the ribbon-
length problem [2, 5, 6, 9]. Minimum ropelength is the smallest ratio between the thickness of
a tubular neighbourhood of a knot or link and its length. In this case, the unknot is minimised
by a round circle and certain chain links are minimised by linked piecewise C2 loops [2].
Inthisnote, wedescribeamethodthatinsomecasesleadstothesolutionoftheribbonlength
problem for flat immersed ribbon knot and link diagrams, see Fig. 1. Our method finds the
tightestimmersedflatribbonknotorlinkdiagramsatisfyingsomesimplegeometricconstraints.
These constraints allow us to embed the space of immersed flat ribbon knots and link diagrams
into a larger space of disk diagrams. The latter space has better properties and in particular,
passing to a minimum length is straightforward. Moreover, we can characterise critical points
of length in this larger space as piecewise C2 immersions, formed by concatenations of arcs of
(unit radius) circles and straight line segments.
When a minimum length disk diagram satisfies the conditions for being a ribbon knot or
link, this immediately gives us the solution for the ribbonlength problem for such diagrams.
We give examples where this is the case and also where the minimum length disk diagrams are
Date: November 28, 2021.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57M25, 57M27, 49Q10, 53C42.
Key words and phrases. Knots, links, ribbons, ribbonlength, ropelength.
1
0202
yaM
72
]TG.htam[
1v86131.5002:viXra
2 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
Figure 1. Examples of minimal ribbonlength knot and link diagrams. From
left to right: the trefoil, Hopf link and an element of an infinite family of link
diagrams whose ribbonlength can be computed.
not ribbon. We compute the minimal ribbonlength of some small knot and link diagrams like
the unknot, trefoil, Hopf link and an infinite family of link diagrams - see Figure 1.
Finally using disk diagrams, we are able to give a bound on the number of crossings in a
diagram of a given knot or link which minimises ribbonlength amongst all diagrams.
2. Immersed ribbon loops
An immersion is a C1 map between manifolds whose Jacobian is injective everywhere. We
consider C1 immersed loops γ : S1 → R2, where the length of the derivative ||γ(cid:48)|| = 1/(cid:96) and
S1 = [0,1]/{0 ∼ 1}, denoting the length of the loop by (cid:96). We endow the space of immersed
loops with the C1 metric. A map γ : X → Y is considered either as a function or its image
γ(X) ⊂ Y when no confusion occurs.
The medial axis of an embedded planar loop is the locus of the centres of the circles of
maximal radii which are tangent to the loop and are inscribed in the compact region bounded
by the loop [14]. Note that the medial axis is contained in the focal cut locus, i.e the points in
the region bounded by the loop where either the distance function to the loop has zero Jacobian
or is not smooth. This locus consists of either focal conjugate points for the normal map to the
loop (where the normal map has a singular Jacobian) or focal cut points where there are several
equal length minimising normals to the loop. A simple example is an ellipse where the medial
axis or focal cut locus is a closed interval. The end points of this interval are focal conjugate
points and the interior points are focal cut points.
In this paper, we will use an analogous concept of medial axis for an embedded planar open
or closed arc. Note that the key difference to the case of an embedded loop is that such an
arc does not separate the plane. So we do not restrict attention to one side of the arc. In
particular, the medial axis of an arc is not necessarily connected and there can be components
associated to normals on either side of the arc. So the medial axis for an arc is the locus of
centres of maximal circles touching the arc with interiors disjoint from the arc and is contained
in the focal cut locus of the arc. The medial axis of a closed arc is necessarily closed. Note
we will combine the medial axes of a finite closed arc cover of an immersed loop, obtaining a
closed set as a result.
Definition 2.1. Given a C1 immersion γ : S1 → R2, choose I ⊂ S1 a sufficiently small open or
closed interval such that γ(I) is embedded. The separation bound for γ on I is the condition
that for an arbitrary point c on the medial axis of γ restricted to I, ||γ(s) − c|| ≥ 1, for all
s ∈ I.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 3
Definition 2.2. Given a C1 immersion γ : S1 → R2, the weak separation bound is the
condition that for each point p = γ(s), there are two circles of radius 1 which touch γ at p one
on each side of γ. In other words, the circles pass through p, have a common tangent to γ at p
and locally lie on one side and the other side of γ near p.
Let T(s) and N(s), for s ∈ S1, be a continuous choice of unit length tangent and normal
vectors to γ respectively at γ(s). Let L (s) = (cid:104)γ(s)+tT(s)(cid:105) and L (s) = (cid:104)γ(s)+tN(s)(cid:105) be the
T N
tangent and normal lines passing through γ(s). We define a continuous map Γ : S1×(−1,1) →
R2, which is an extension of γ, by Γ(s,t) = γ(s) + tN(s). So Γ(s,0) = γ(s), for s ∈ S1.
The notation Γ will be considered either an immersion of an open annulus or its image when
no confusion occurs, assuming that γ satisfies the separation bound for a collection of small
intervals covering γ.
Proposition 2.3. Let γ : S1 → R2 be an immersed loop and I ⊂ S1 be a closed interval so
that γ(I) is embedded and γ satisfies the separation bound for γ on I. If I is sufficiently small
then Γ(I ×(−1,1)) is embedded.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Γ(s,t) = Γ(s(cid:48),t(cid:48)), where (s,t) (cid:54)= (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)), s,s(cid:48) ∈ I
and 0 ≤ t,t(cid:48) < 1. Firstly, we cannot have t = t(cid:48) = 0 since γ(I) is embedded. Next we cannot
have t = t(cid:48) (cid:54)= 0 since this would contradict the separation bound. In fact, since I is closed, in
this case we can find t = t(cid:48) (cid:54)= 0 minimal so that Γ(s,t) = Γ(s(cid:48),t) is a point on the medial axis
at a distance at most t < 1 from γ.
So it remains to deal with the case that t (cid:54)= t(cid:48). Consider the smallest value of min{t,t(cid:48)} for
which Γ(s,t) = Γ(s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) for s,s(cid:48) ∈ I. (We need I closed to find such a smallest value). Consider
the angle between the normal lines L (s),L (s(cid:48)) at X = Γ(s,t) = Γ(s(cid:48),t(cid:48)). If the angle is zero
N N
then s = s(cid:48) and this is impossible as the normal line is embedded. Since I is chosen as a small
closed interval, the angle between the normal lines will also be small. Now we can perturb X
to X ˆ along the bisector of this angle. By continuity, we claim that we can find (sˆ,tˆ) near (s,t)
and (sˆ(cid:48),tˆ(cid:48)) near (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) so that X ˆ = Γ(sˆ,tˆ) = Γ(sˆ(cid:48),tˆ(cid:48)) and tˆ< t,tˆ(cid:48) < t(cid:48).
The claim follows by analysing the distance to the curve γ. Note that as I is small, sˆ,sˆ(cid:48)
will be between s,s(cid:48) in I. The reason is by the weak separation bound, there are two circles
of radius one which touch γ at either of γ(s),γ(t) (see Figure ?). In particular, γ is locally
between these circles near γ(s),γ(t) respectively. Hence if we choose an initial point X lying on
the line segment L joining these two circles and perturb it in the direction of a small angle to
this line, clearly the closest point on γ to the perturbed point will move in the same direction
away from L as the perturbation of X. Hence since we have chosen the perturbation as the
bisector of the angle between the normal lines to γ(s),γ(t), we see that sˆ,sˆ(cid:48) will be between
s,s(cid:48) in I.
But this contradicts our choice since min{tˆ,tˆ(cid:48)} < min{t,t(cid:48)}. So this completes the proof. (cid:3)
Definition 2.4. Assume that γ is an immersed loop satisfying the separation bound for each
of a collection of closed intervals covering S1. The crossing condition is the following re-
quirements:
• γ and Γ have only double points of self-intersection. In particular, γ self-intersects in
isolated double points or double intervals (for the latter, the self-intersections are not
transverse). Also, for any isolated double point p (or double interval J) of γ, there is a
neighbourhood U (or U ) so that Γ−1(U ) = D ∪D (or Γ−1(U ) = D ∪D ), where
p J p 1 2 J 1 2
D ,D are disjoint open disks, see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.
1 2
• The two branches of γ cross at p or J, see Fig. 2.
4 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
• S1×(−1,1)\D is contractible, for i = 1,2. Moreover S1×(−1,1)\D has n contractible
i
components, where D consists of n pre-images of neighbourhoods of all isolated double
points and double intervals for γ.
• D ∩(S1×{0}) is connected for i = 1,2. So U ∩γ (or U ∩γ) consists of two intersecting
i p J
open intervals.
• The pre-images of all double points of Γ come from such pairs of disks D ,D .
1 2
Figure 2. Thebrokenlinesaretheribbonloopγ (core)associatedwiththeopen
ribbonΓ,whilethearrowsshowabranchofγ. Thegreyareasareneighbourhoods
around self-intersections. From left to right: a ribbon self-intersecting at an
isolated double point. A ribbon self-intersecting in a double interval. A non-
crossing self-intersection at a double point. A non-crossing self-intersection in a
double interval. Finally, a self-intersection not satisfying the crossing condition
as the ribbon self-intersects but there are no associated double points or intervals
of the core.
Definition 2.5. A C1 immersed loop γ : S1 → R2 satisfying the crossing condition and the
separation bound for a collection of closed intervals covering S1 is called a ribbon loop. The
immersed open annular neighbourhood Γ(S1 × (−1,1)) of a ribbon loop γ(S1) is called the
ribbon associated to the loop. A finite collection of C1 loops which together satisfy these two
conditions is called a ribbon link. The space of ribbon knots and links has the standard C1
topology.
Observation 2.6.
(1) Critical self-distance. Suppose that the normal lines L (s),L (t) coincide for s (cid:54)= t.
N N
Since γ(cid:48)(s) and γ(cid:48)(t) are parallel, we have that γ(cid:48)(s)·(γ(s)−γ(t)) = γ(cid:48)(t)·(γ(s)−γ(t)) =
0. This gives a double critical self-distance (cid:107)γ(s) − γ(t)(cid:107) between γ(s),γ(t), [9]. We
observe that a bound on medial axis distance implies a bound on double critical self-
distance between such points γ(s),γ(t).
(2) Bound on curvature. If there is a maximal radius circle with centre c which is
tangent to γ at γ(s) satisfying ||γ(s)−c|| < 1, then this implies that γ does not satisfy
the separation condition. This implies that the curvature κ of γ is at most 1 at all
points where a ribbon loop or link γ is C2.
Moreover, ribbon loops or links are C1,1 curves. To see this, note for s fixed, if there
are sufficiently close points t ∈ S1 to s satisfying ||γ(cid:48)(s)−γ(cid:48)(t)|| > k|s−t|/(cid:96) with k > 1,
then the maximal radius circle touching the loop at γ(s) has radius smaller than 1,
which again contradicts the separation condition. So this establishes that ribbon loops
are C1,1 curves.
Finally the same argument shows that C1 immersed loops or links satisfying the weak
separation bound are also in the class C1,1. This will be important when we discuss
loops in disk space.
(3) Non-overlapping condition. Two branches of the open annular neighbourhood Γ of
a ribbon loop or link γ intersect only if their core components of γ intersect, see Fig. 2.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 5
(4) Complementary regions. A ribbon loop or link separates the plane into open com-
plementary connected domains each of whose boundary is a piecewise C1 polygon.
Figure 3. For a double point p of γ there is a neighbourhood U so that
p
Γ−1(U ) = D ∪ D , where D ,D are disjoint open disks which separate the
p 1 2 1 2
annulus into contractible components. Note that Γ(s,0) = γ(s), for s ∈ S1.
Proposition 2.7. Each complementary region of a ribbon loop or link contains an open disk
with radius 1.
Proof. Each complementary region P of a ribbon loop or link γ is a union of open domains
each of whose boundary is a piecewise C1 polygon. Consider the ribbon Γ associated with γ.
(Recall we abuse notation by denoting mappings and images by the same symbol, when this
does not create confusion). It is clearly sufficient to show that P \Γ is non empty. For if we
can find a point c ∈ P \Γ then the open disk of radius 1 centred at c is clearly in P, since Γ
contains all points distance < 1 from γ.
Suppose by way of contradiction that P ⊂ Γ. We claim this contradicts the crossing con-
dition satisfied by γ. Note that the crossing condition implies that the image of the ribbon
Γ deformation retracts onto the ribbon loop or link γ, see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. In fact the
crossing condition shows that the image ribbon can be viewed as an open regular neighbour-
hood of the image loop or link. Hence there is an isomorphism between first homology groups
H (γ,Z) → H (Γ,Z) induced by inclusion, where we are identifying maps with their images in
1 1
the plane. But P fills in a non-zero homologous cycle of γ, namely ∂P. So if P ⊂ Γ then the
first homology H (Γ) would not be isomorphic to H (γ). So this contradiction establishes the
1 1
result.
(cid:3)
Observation 2.8. Proposition 2.7 does not extend to a finite collection of C1 ribbon loops
unless they collectively satisfy the ribbon conditions.
Definition 2.9. A C1 immersed planar loop or link is said to satisfy the double point con-
dition if it has finitely many isolated double points and double intervals.
Theorem 2.10. Ribbon loops and links satisfy the double point condition.
Proof. Clearly the double points (or intervals) of a C0 loop form a closed set in S1. If there
are infinitely many isolated double points or double intervals, then these accumulate at a
double point or double interval. But this contradicts the crossing condition satisfied by ribbon
loops. The explanation is the existence of disks D ,D associated with double points or double
1 2
intervals (see Fig 3) implies that the connected components of the set of double points in S1 are
the individual double points and double intervals, since pairs of such points and intervals are
6 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
separated by open sets. (The closed subsets of the plane have the usual Hausdorff topology).
Hence, there cannot be an accumulation point in this set. The same argument clearly applies
to a ribbon link. (cid:3)
We immediately have the following.
Corollary 2.11. A ribbon loop or link partitions the plane into a finite number of open disk
regions with exactly one being unbounded.
Definition 2.12. Disk space D is the space of finite collections of C1 immersed planar loops
satisfying the following;
• the double point condition
• the weak separation condition
• there is an open disk of radius 1 contained in each complementary region. Here comple-
mentary regions are obtained by taking the unions of complementary connected open
domains which are adjacent at non-crossing isolated double points and intervals. (See
Fig. 2 third and fourth diagrams).
Also D has the standard C1 topology.
The elements in D are called disk diagrams. In particular, a ribbon loop or link is an element
of D.
Observation 2.13. A connected component of disk space D consists of all representations of a
finite collection of C1 immersed planar loops, satisfying the required properties, with the same
combinatorial type of complementary regions. Here the combinatorial type of a complementary
region is defined by splitting the region open along all non-crossing double points and intervals
using the resulting polygonal type. Equivalently, the loop or link can be perturbed to remove
all non-crossing double points and intervals and the resulting complementary domains have the
required combinatorial types.
Observation 2.14. Note that as complementary regions contain open disks of radius 1, they
cannot disappear under limits of sequences of loops. New non-crossing double points can
appear or disappear under limits, but by definition, these do not change the combinatorial type
of complementary regions.
3. Ribbonlength minimisers
For a ribbon loop γ : S1 → R2, we have defined the ribbon map Γ : S1 × (−1,1) → R2
whose image is also immersed, and abused notation by identifying a map with its image. We
use similar notation for ribbon links.
Definition 3.1. The combinatorial type of a ribbon loop or link is defined by the collection of
complementary connected domains. Two sets of domains are equivalent if there is a bijection
betweenthempreservingtheboundarystructurealongthelooporlink,wherethecorresponding
polygonal types of the open complementary connected domains are isomorphic. By boundary
structure, we mean divide the boundary into arcs bounded by vertices which are either isolated
double points or ends of double intervals.
By convention, we use representative of a given ribbon diagram to mean any ribbon diagram
with the same combinatorial type.
Definition 3.2. A ribbon diagram is cs if its core is a finite C1 concatenation of arcs of circles
of radius 1 and line segments. The complexity of a cs ribbon diagram is the number of arcs of
circles of radius 1 plus the number of line segments.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 7
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that γ is a ribbon diagram. Then minimal length ribbon representatives
of γ exist.
Proof. ByObservation2.6, weknowthatthecoreofaribbonknotorlinkdiagramisintheclass
C1,1. Therefore, we can apply the Arzela-Ascoli theorem and conclude that given a sequence
γ of ribbon representatives of γ, so that the lengths ||γ || converge to the infimum of lengths
i i
in the class of γ, there are convergent subsequences of the γ . The limit of such a subsequence
i
is a loop or link γˆ which is C1 and realises the least length in the class of γ.
We will show that either γˆ satisfies the ribbon conditions and γˆ is a representative of γ or
this is true after a modification of γˆ which does not change its length. We will denote the
subsequence converging to γˆ by γ again. For the separation bound, note that none of the loops
i
or links γ have points in their medial axes closer than distance 1 to the loops or links. But then
i
it is easy to deduce the same is true for γˆ. To verify this, choose a sequence of maximal circles
touching each γ at a point x , so that the sequence x converges to x on γˆ and the circles are
i i i
all on sides of γ corresponding to a given side of γˆ at x. Then there is a subsequence of these
i
circles which converges to a circle touching γˆ at x. So the radius of a maximal circle touching
γˆ at x is at least 1 as claimed. This implies that γˆ satisfies the separation bound.
ˆ
For the crossing condition, we claim that double points of Γ are limits of double points for Γ .
i
Notice that the domain and image of Γ ,Γ ˆ are open sets. If there are points (s,t) (cid:54)= (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) with
i
Γ ˆ (s,t) = Γ ˆ (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) then Γ ˆ (s,t) = Γ ˆ (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) = limΓ (s,t) = limΓ (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)). The image of Γ contains
i i i
a disk of some fixed radius about Γ (s,t) and similarly for Γ (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)), by convergence of Γ to Γ ˆ .
i i i
Hence for i large enough, Γ (s,t),Γ (s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) are sufficiently close that these disks overlap and we
i i
have double points of Γ which converge to (s,t),(s(cid:48),t(cid:48)) as claimed.
i
Next, we can take limits of subsequences of pairs of disks Di,Di in the pre-image of Γ
1 2 i
ˆ ˆ
corresponding to an isolated double point or double interval of γ to get pairs of disks D ,D
i 1 2
ˆ
corresponding to double points or double intervals for γˆ in the pre-image of Γ, establishing that
ˆ
Γ also satisfies one of the requirements for the crossing condition. This follows using Hausdorff
convergence of subsets of the plane, see [11]. However although the complements of the disks
ˆ ˆ ˆ
D are contractible, this does not follow necessarily for their limits D ,D - see Fig. 4b. To fix
i 1 2
this issue, we will need to modify γˆ and this will be done later in the proof.
Figure 4. (a) the limit of a sequence of double points for the γ can lie in a
i
double interval of γˆ. (b) two “close” double points x,x for γˆ. (c) the tangents to
λ ,λ may agree at x(cid:48). (d) a switch between the arcs λ and λ .
1 2 1 2
To continue the proof of the crossing condition, we need to show the double point set S of γˆ
inside U ˆ = Γ ˆ (D ˆ ) = Γ ˆ (D ˆ ) is a single point or interval and also verify that D ˆ ∩(S1 ×{0}) is
1 2 i
ˆ
connected for i = 1,2. For the former, we claim that the double points of γˆ inside U are either
8 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
isolated double points or double intervals. We can suppose by passing to a subsequence that
the corresponding double points for γ in U = Γ (Di) = Γ (Di) are a convergent set of isolated
i i i 1 i 2
double points or double intervals. We claim that S is either a double point or double interval
which contains the limit of the sets of double points for the γ in U . (Note that the limit of
i i
a sequence of double points for the γ can lie in a double interval of γˆ - see Fig. 4a). So the
i
problem is to show that S∩U ˆ is connected - it is clearly closed and contains the limit of the
ˆ
sets of double points for the γ in U.
i
Suppose that S is not connected. Since S is closed, its complement in γˆ∩U ˆ is open. Then we
can choose two arcs λ ,λ of γˆ with common end points x,x(cid:48), where ∂λ = ∂λ = {x,x(cid:48)} are in
1 2 1 2
different components of S and int γ is disjoint from S for i = 1,2. We can also assume without
i
loss of generality that the double point component of γˆ containing x, is part of the limit of
the double sets for γ . We will prove that this contradicts the assumption that γˆ achieves the
i
minimum of length amongst representatives of γ if there is a non-zero angle between λ ,λ at
1 2
x. See Fig. 4b.
We can choose two subarcs of γ starting at the sequence of double points x which converge
i i
to x as i → ∞, with the other ends x(cid:48),x(cid:48)(cid:48) both converging to x(cid:48). These arcs converge to the
i i
two branches λ ,λ of γˆ. Moreover the tangents to λ ,λ agree at x(cid:48), since clearly this is a
1 2 1 2
non-crossing double point of γˆ. See Fig. 4c. The key idea is to use the Meeks-Yau exchange
and round-off trick ([10]) to get a contradiction to the assumption that the length of γˆ is the
infimum of lengths in the class of γ. This will not only eliminate the extra self-intersection of
ˆ
γˆ but also the problem of the complement of the disks D failing to be contractible.
i
We modify γˆ in two stages. See Fig. 4d. Firstly we switch the arcs λ and λ . Note that the
1 2
new loop is smooth at x(cid:48) but not at x. Next we need to ‘smooth the corners’ at x created by
this exchange. The idea is to use two unit radius circles tangent to two branches of γˆ at x as in
Fig. 5 top. We then replace parts of these branches with an arc µ,ν of each circle to produce a
new C1 path, which is the required further modification of γˆ. Since radial projection onto µ,ν
reduces length, replacement of segments of the two branches of γˆ by µ,ν decreases the length
of γˆ. Let us denote the further modified loop by γ∗.
Figure 5. Top: Smoothing the corners at x. Bottom: An example where the
ˆ
centres of the unit circles are where the boundary of the ribbon Γ crosses itself.
Next we claim that no new double points are introduced in γ∗ as compared with γˆ. It suffices
to show that there are no intersections of γˆ and µ, except at the endpoints of µ. If we can show
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 9
ˆ
that µ,ν are contained in U then this follows. But the centres of the unit radius circles are
ˆ
where the boundary of the ribbon Γ crosses itself - see Fig. 5 bottom. Hence it is easy to see
that as well as µ,ν ⊂ U ˆ , the ribbon Γ∗ for γ∗ is contained in Γ ˆ . Moreover, the modified loop
γ∗ clearly satisfies that the modified disks D∗,D∗ have contractible complements - see Fig. 6.
1 2
Figure 6. A modification of γˆ such that the resultant loop γ∗ has disks D∗,D∗
1 2
of contractible complements.
For the final crossing condition for γ∗, we need to show that D∗ ∩ (S1 × {0}) is connected
j
for j = 1,2. We know that Di ∩(S1 ×{0}) is connected for j = 1,2 and for all i. Moreover
j
D ˆ is the limit of Di as i → ∞ and γˆ is the limit of γ as i → ∞. It is easy to see that the
j j i
modification of γˆ to γ∗ gives D ˆ ∩(S1×{0}) = D∗∩(S1×{0}) and so we see immediately that
j j
this is also connected. So this completes the proof that γˆ or γ∗ satisfies this crossing condition.
Hence we have shown that the assumptions that the crossing condition is a single double
ˆ
point or interval for γˆ in U is violated and the angle at x between the branches of γˆ is non-zero
lead to a contradiction.
It remains to consider the case that the angle at x between the branches of γˆ is zero. In
this case, suppose without loss of generality that (cid:107)λ | ≤ (cid:107)λ (cid:107). We modify γˆ by replacing λ
1 2 2
with a copy of λ . Hence for the modified loop, which we denote again by γ∗, the double set
1
now contains λ and the length is at most that of γˆ. We can continue doing this if there are
1
further such pairs of branches of γ∗ with ends which are tangential, until no such branches
occur. This clearly gives a new loop in the same class as γ with minimum length. Moreover
for this modified loop, we see that D ˆ ∩ (S1 × {0}) = D∗ ∩ (S1 × {0}) is connected and the
j j
complement of D is contractible - see Fig. 6.
j
So this completes the proof of all parts of the crossing condition for γ∗ and the argument
also shows that it is in the same diagram class as γ.
(cid:3)
Definition 3.4. The ribbonlength Rib(γ) of a ribbon knot or link γ is the ratio of the length
of the core γ to the width of the ribbon Γ,
Length(γ) Length(γ)
Rib(γ) = =
Width(Γ) 2
4. Length minimisers in disk space
Theorem 4.1. (1) Length minimisers in disk space exist and are cs.
(2) Suppose that a length minimiser of a ribbon knot or link in disk space is ribbon. Then
this disk space minimiser is also a length minimiser in ribbon space.
Proof. By Proposition 2.7, Observation 2.8 and Theorem 2.10 all the ribbon loop diagrams or
link diagrams in a given class are contained in a component of disk space, which we will denote
10 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
by D . Here we abuse notation by using γ as both a single realisation of a given ribbon loop
γ
or link diagram or the class of such realisations.
Firstly, we need to prove that D has length minimisers. Later on we will show that such
γ
minimisers are of cs type. Firstly in disk space, loops satisfy the weak separation bound, so by
Observation 2.6 and the Arzela-Ascoli theorem, we can find a C1 limit γˆ of a sequence of loops
or links γ in D whose lengths converge to the infimum of length. To show that γˆ is in D ,
i γ γ
we need to first establish that γˆ satisfies the weak separation condition. This follows by the
approach in Theorem 3.3. In particular at a sequence of points x on γ converging to x on γˆ,
i i
there are two circles of radius one which touch γ at x on either side. These circles converge to
i i
a similar pair of circles touching γˆ at x on each side, establishing the weak separation condition.
Note that the double points of γˆ don’t necessarily exactly match those of γ under taking
i
limits. There are two ambiguities in the matchings. The first is that isolated double points
may switch with double intervals. The second is that new non-crossing double points or double
intervals may appear in the limit γˆ. However it is still true that the complementary regions
of γˆ match those of members of γ under limits and there are still unit radius disks in these
i
regions for γˆ, by taking limits of such disks in the corresponding regions of γ . (Recall that non-
i
crossing double points and double intervals do not separate complementary regions, so having
new such points and intervals in γˆ does not change the class of loop or link). Consequently,
this completes the proof that minimisers of length exist in D .
γ
Clearly it suffices to show that C1 minimisers of length in D are always of cs type, to
γ
complete the first part of the Theorem.
Figure 7. Left: The subarc λ does not touch the unit radius disks (in grey) in
the complementary regions for γˆ on either side of λ. Right: We shorten λ by
replacing it by a Dubins solution of type csc (circle-line segment-circle).
The argument that a C1 length minimiser γˆ of D is of cs type is by contradiction. We can
γ
divide γˆ into a finite collection of short subarcs with the following properties. Suppose first one
of the short subarcs λ of γˆ does not touch the unit radius disks in the complementary regions
for γˆ on either side of λ. We can then shorten λ by replacing it by a Dubins solution (see [1]
and Fig. 7) with the same endpoints and end directions as λ if the latter is not of cs type. We
can choose the subarcs so that any such a λ is short enough relative to its distance from the
adjacent unit radius disks, so that the Dubins solution will also miss these disks.
We also need to consider subarcs λ of γˆ with one or both ends on a unit radius disk in a
complementary region, so that the interior of λ is disjoint from any of these disks. Again if λ
is short enough and not of cs type, then we can replace it by a Dubins solution with the same
endpoints and end directions as λ so that the new arc has still has interior disjoint from these
disks. See Fig. 7 and [1]. Note that the unit disks at the ends of λ are tangential to λ.
Hence we have found a shorter loop or link in D , contradicting our choice of γˆ as shortest.
γ
Next, by the above argument it follows that γˆ is a collection of Dubins solutions possibly
connecting points on the boundaries of the unit disks in the complementary regions. Moreover
at these unit disk boundary points, γˆ must be tangent to the unit circles. To conclude that
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 11
γˆ is cs, it remains to verify it is a finite concatenation of Dubins curves together with arcs of
unit disks joined smoothly together. If there were infinitely many Dubins curves, then these
would end at infinitely many points on the boundary of the unit disks. Such points would
accumulate. But if two such points are very close, it is easy to see [1] that any embedded
Dubins curve joining them is the arc of the unit circle. Hence at an accumulation point, we
would have such arcs joining up smoothly and hence do get a finite number of Dubins curves
as required, unless infinitely many of these arcs had self intersections. But in the latter case, γˆ
would have infinitely many self-crossing points, which is a contradiction. So this establishes a
ribbon length minimiser is of cs type and is in D .
γ
By assumption, if the ribbon conditions of separation and crossing are satisfied by this disk
length minimiser, then this provides a ribbon length minimiser, since disk space contains ribbon
space. This completes the proof. (cid:3)
5. Variational approach
In this section we study critical points of length for elements in disk space D. Then in Section
6 we will show how the ribbonlength varies as the knot diagram changes, so long as the length
minimiser in disk space is a ribbon loop.
AusefulphysicalmodelforstudyingcriticalpointsoflengthforloopsinDisafinitecollection
of n unit radius disks (each of these corresponds to a bounded complementary region of the
loop) and an elastic band being the loop itself. For each of the n disks, there are two degrees of
freedom, whicharethecoordinatesofitscentre. Accordingly, theconfigurationspaceisasubset
of R2n. In addition, there is a distance constraint, that the centres of a pair of unit disks must
be separated by a distance of at least 2 (see also Proposition 2.7). Our approach is based on the
following proposition from the work of Kirszenblat et. al. on minimal curvature-constrained
networks [8] inspired by the work of Rubinstein and Thomas on Steiner trees [12].
Figure 8. Left: an illustration of Proposition 5.1. The other illustrations are
for Proposition 5.2.
Proposition 5.1. Suppose that p p p is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
1 2 3
arc of a unit circle and a line segment with common point p such that p is held fixed while
2 1
p is varied, as shown in Fig. 8 left. Then the first variation of length of p p p is the inner
3 1 2 3
product between the direction of variation and the unit vector from p to p .
2 3
Proof. Suppose that p moves along any smooth curve with derivative at its initial position
3
being the vector v. Let (cid:96) denote the length of p p p . The curve p p , of length θ, is an arc of
1 2 3 1 2
a unit circle whose centre c is considered the origin.
Let nˆ be the unit vector from the origin to the point p and x the vector from p to p , with
2 2 3
length denoted by x and unit vector in the direction of x denoted by xˆ. Observe that the first
variation of the vector x is equal to the first variation of its head v minus the first variation of
12 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
its tail nˆ. If the point p is perturbed in the direction of v, then the first variation of length of
3
p p p is
1 2 3
(cid:96)(cid:48) = θ(cid:48) +x(cid:48)
= nˆ(cid:48) ·xˆ +x(cid:48) ·xˆ
= nˆ(cid:48) ·xˆ +(v−nˆ(cid:48))·xˆ
= v·xˆ
(cid:3)
As a consequence of Proposition 5.1, we obtain the following proposition.
Proposition 5.2. Suppose that p p p p is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
1 2 3 4
arc of a unit radius circle with centre c (fixed), followed by a line segment, followed by an arc
1
of a unit radius circle with centre c (variable), as shown in Fig. 8. Then the first variation
2
of length of p p p p is the scalar product between the vector of variation and the unit vector
1 2 3 4
from p to p .
2 3
Proof. Suppose that the centre c (respectively the point p ) moves along any smooth curve
2 4
with derivative at its initial position being the vector v (respectively a parallel translation of
this curve with the derivative v at p ). Let (cid:96) denote the length of the curve p p p p . We may
4 1 2 3 4
view the case where the line segment has zero length as a limiting case, see Fig. 8 right. In
this case, the points p and p coincide and we define the unit vector xˆ to be tangent to the
2 3
disks at the point p and pointing in the direction of motion along the curve when traveling
2
from the point p toward the point p . Let m denote the midpoint of the straight segment p p ,
1 4 2 3
which coincides with the points p and p if the straight segment is degenerate. Let (cid:96) and (cid:96)
2 3 1 2
denote the respective lengths of the curves p p m and mp p , both of which are curves as in
1 2 3 4
Proposition 5.1. Observe that the first variation of the midpoint m is half that of the centre c .
2
By proposition 5.1, if the point m is perturbed in the direction of v/2, then the first variation
of length of p p m is
1 2
1
(cid:96)(cid:48) = v·xˆ
1 2
On the other hand, if we subtract v from all elements in Fig 8, then we see that the first
variation of length of mp p is
3 4
(cid:96)(cid:48) = −1v·−xˆ
2 2
= 1v·xˆ
2
Summing these two terms, we obtain for the first variation of length of p p p p
1 2 3 4
(cid:96)(cid:48) = (cid:96)(cid:48) +(cid:96)(cid:48) = v·xˆ
1 2
(cid:3)
Observation5.3. WehaveestablishedthatminimallengthelementsindiskspaceDmustbecs
diskdiagrams, inTheorem4.1. Tocomputethefirstvariationofthelengthofacsdiskdiagram
(asthepositionsofthedisksarevaried)wefirstdecomposethecsdiskdiagramintocurves, each
of which is a concatenation of an arc of a unit radius circle, followed by a line segment, followed
by an arc of a unit radius circle as in Proposition 5.2. Then, we simply add the contributions
coming from each piece in this decomposition. Concretely, suppose that the ith disk moves
along a smooth curve t → c(t) ∈ R2 with velocity vector v = dc while the remaining disks are
dt
held fixed. Moreover, suppose that there are 2k (possibly degenerate) straight segments lying
tangent to the ith disk with outward pointing unit vectors uˆ ,uˆ ,...,uˆ , see Fig. 9. Let (cid:96)
1 2 2k
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 13
denote the length of the loop γ and (x ,x ) the centre of the ith disk. Then the directional
2i−1 2i
derivative D(cid:96)(v) of (cid:96) in the direction of v at the configuration point x = (x ,x ,...,x ) is
1 2 2n
given by
D(cid:96)(v) = lim (cid:96)(x ,x ,...,x +c (t),x +c (t),...,x )−(cid:96)(x ,x ,...,x )
1 2 2i−1 1 2i 2 2n 1 2 2n
t→0+
= (uˆ +uˆ +...+uˆ )·v.
1 2 2k
Figure 9.
6. Examples of ribbonlength minimisers
We compute the minimal ribbonlength for some small knot and link diagrams. We discuss
the minimal ribbonlength of the standard figure-8 knot diagram and observe that there exists a
minimum length disk diagram that does not satisfy the separation bound. We give a conjecture
about the minimal ribbonlength for the standard figure-8 knot diagram. We finish this section
by providing an infinite family of link diagrams whose minimal ribbonlength can be easily
computed.
6.1. The minimal ribbonlength of the unknot.
Since Length(γ) = 2π, the ribbonlength of the unknot is clearly Rib(unknot) = π for the
standard diagram γ, see Fig. 10. We will see in the next section that this is also the minimal
ribbon length over all diagrams of the unknot.
Figure 10. Left: the ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for the standard
unknotdiagram. Right: theribbonknotofminimalribbonlengthforthestandard
unknot with one twist.
6.1.1. The twisted unknot. We compute the effect of a twist on the ribbonlength of the unknot.
See Fig. 10. Without loss of generality, consider the disk diagram in Fig. 11 (a), and fix the
position of D . We claim that D must touch D at a single point. Suppose to the contrary
0 1 0
that D does not touch D . Let the contribution to the negative gradient of length from the
1 0
centre of D be denoted by u. If D and D do not touch, we can always decrease the length
1 0 1
of the disk diagram by perturbing the disk D in the direction of the negative gradient u.
1
14 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
In addition, since D and D belong to different regions separated by the disk diagram, the
0 1
distance between their centres is at least 2. We conclude that D and D intersect at a single
0 1
point. It is easy to see that the minimal length disk diagram is in fact a minimal length ribbon
loop. Since the length of the minimal ribbon loop is 4π, the ribbonlength of a twisted unknot
is 2π.
In general, a twist adds 2π to the length of a minimal disk diagram by a similar argument.
6.2. The minimal ribbonlength of the standard trefoil knot diagram.
We will prove that the disk diagram for the standard trefoil diagram in Fig. 12 left is a length
minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D , D , D and D as in Fig. 11 (b)-(d). Let us
0 1 2 3
fix the position of the disk D . We will show that each of the three disks D , D and D touches
0 1 2 3
the disk D and a length minimising loop is connected to it by straight segments. Suppose to
0
the contrary that one of the three disks D , D and D , say D , touches no other disks. In
1 2 3 2
order for the disk D to be in mechanical equilibrium, meaning that we cannot decrease the
2
length of the curve by perturbing the disk D , the disk diagram must be as in Fig. 12 (b).
2
In this case, the disk D is connected to the disk D by two straight segments and to each
2 0
of the disks D and D by one straight segment. We can decrease the length of the curve by
1 3
perturbing one of the two disks D and D , say D , in the direction of a vector v which makes
1 3 1
an acute angle with the negative gradient.
Next, suppose that one of the three disks D , D and D , say D , is prevented from touching
1 2 3 2
the disk D by at least one of the two disks D and D , see Fig. 11 (c). In this case, we cannot
0 1 3
perturb the disk D in the direction of the negative gradient, because it will intersect the disk
1
D . However, we can perturb the disk D in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute
0 1
angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.
Finally, suppose that each of the disks D , D and D touches the disk D , but that at least
1 2 3 0
one of the disks D , D and D , say D , is not connected to the disk D by straight segments,
1 2 3 2 0
see Fig. 11 (d). In this case, we can perturb one of the disks D or D in the direction of a
1 3
vector v which makes an acute angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length
of the curve.
Observe that there is a 2-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating
two of the three disks D ,D and D about the disk D . To see this, observe that the contri-
1 2 3 0
bution to the negative gradient from the position of, say, the disk D , which we denote by u,
1
points from the centre of the disk D to that of the disk D . Since the disk D is held fixed,
1 0 0
the smallest admissible angle between the vectors u and v, i.e. the perturbation vector, is π/2.
That is, the rate of change of the length of the core γ is at least zero. This is true so long as
we rotate the disk D about the disk D in some neighbourhood of the original configuration.
1 0
In Fig. 11 (h) we illustrate the other minimal crossing disk diagram for the trefoil. This
cannot be a ribbon loop since it violates, for example, the separation bound since ||p −p || < 2.
0 1
SinceLength(γ) = 12+4π,theribbonlengthofthestandardtrefoilknotdiagramisRib(trefoil) =
6+2π.
Observation 6.1. Tangential crossings do not separate disk regions. Recall that in
Definition 2.12 we allowed crossings to be tangential in disk space. Consider three simple
loops with an intersection pattern like that of three Olympic circles (a planar projection of the
Borromean rings). Note that a minimal double point representative of this diagram separates
the plane into six regions, one of which is unbounded. A tight disk diagram for the three
Olympic circles is shown in Fig. 11 (i). Therefore the length minimiser in disk space divides
the plane into seven connected domains, two of which are separated by a tangential crossing
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 15
Figure 11. The black trace represents a disk diagram for the standard trefoil
knot diagram for (b)-(d) and for the standard Hopf link diagram for (e)-(g). The
vector u denotes a contribution to the negative gradient for the length of a disk
diagram. The centre of D moves along a smooth curve with derivative at its
1
initial position being the vector v. The illustration (h) is a minimal crossing
trefoil disk diagram that violates the separation bound as ||p −p || < 2. In (i)
0 1
the green portions are part of the same region as p is a tangential (fake) crossing.
The disk D is obtained from Proposition 2.7, see Observation 6.1.
2
Figure 12. Left: Alengthminimisingribbonloop(core)forthestandardtrefoil
diagram. Right: a ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for this trefoil diagram.
denoted by p. In Fig. 11 (i) the green portions are part of the same complementary region and
D is the disk obtained from Proposition 2.7.
2
16 JOSE´ AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
6.3. The minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.
We will prove that the disk diagram corresponding to the standard Hopf link diagram in Fig.
13 left is a length minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D , D and D as in Fig 11
0 1 2
(e)-(g). Let us fix the position of the disk D . We will show that each of the two disks D and
0 1
D touches the disk D and is connected to it by straight segments for a length minimising
2 0
representative. Suppose to the contrary that at least one of the two disks D and D , say D ,
1 2 1
does not touch the disk D . In particular, the disk D touches no other disks. In Fig. 11 (e),
0 1
the contribution to the negative gradient from the position of the disk D is denoted by u. We
1
can decrease the length of the curve by perturbing the disk D in the direction of the negative
1
gradient. Similarly, if the two disks D and D touch one another but do not touch the disk
1 2
D , then we can perturb the two disks D and D collectively in the direction of the negative
0 1 2
gradient.
Next, suppose that one of the two disks D and D , say D , serves as an obstacle preventing
1 2 1
the disk D from touching the disk D , see Fig.11 (f). Let u denote the contribution to the
2 0
negative gradient from the position of the disk D . In this case, we cannot perturb the disk
1
D in the direction of the negative gradient, because it touches the disk D . However, we can
1 0
perturb the disk D in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle with the vector
1
u. In this way, we can decrease the length of the curve.
Finally, suppose that both of the disks D and D touch the disk D , but that neither of the
1 2 0
two disks D and D is connected to the disk D by straight segments, see Fig. 11 (g). In this
1 2 0
case, we can perturb the disk D in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle
1
with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.
SinceLength(γ) = 8+4π,theribbonlengthofthestandardHopflinkdiagramisRib(Hopf link) =
4+2π.
Figure 13. Left: A length minimising ribbon loop (core) for the standard Hopf
link diagram. Note that there is a 1-parameter family of minimisers (up to
isometries) that is obtained by rotating D or D about the disk D . Right: the
1 2 0
ribbon link of minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.
6.4. On the ribbonlength of the standard figure-8 knot diagram.
Regarding the disk diagram for the standard figure-8 knot diagram, there is a simple ar-
gument to show that the configuration depicted in Fig. 14 left, where the centres of the
√ √
disks D ,D ,D ,D and D are positioned at the points (0,0),(− 3,−1),(0,−2),( 3,−1)
0 1 2 3 4
and (0,2), respectively, gives a minimum length element in disk space D. To see this, observe
that we can decompose the core γ into three loops γ ,γ and γ as in Fig. 14. By a variational
1 2 3
argument similar to those given above, it is clear that the respective lengths of the loops γ ,γ
1 2
and γ must be at least 2π,4+2π and 8+π due to the number of disks contained inside each
3
of the three loops. Since the configuration depicted in Fig. 14 left attains all three bounds, it
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 17
gives a minimum length element in disk space D for disk diagrams of the combinatorial type of
the standard figure-8 knot diagram. The corresponding ribbon is illustrated in Fig. 15. Note
there is a 1-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating the disk D
4
about the disk D .
0
= + +
Figure 14. Adecompositionofaminimaldiskdiagramforthestandardfigure-8
knot diagram.
Observation 6.2. The previous example of a minimiser in D for disk diagrams with the com-
binatorial type of the standard figure-8 knot diagram violates the non-overlapping condition.
This configuration of disks does not lead to a ribbon knot diagram since the associated ribbon
loop violates the separation condition ||p − p || < 2, and consequently, the ribbon violates
0 1
the non-overlapping condition, see Fig. 15. Observe that one segment of the ribbon overlaps
another in a coloured wedge in Fig. 15 (left), even though the corresponding core components
do not intersect one another. A third ribbon segment lies above one of the two segments and
beneath the other. The non-overlapping condition places an additional constraint on the disk
diagram required for it to be ribbon.
A conjectured minimiser that satisfies the non-overlapping condition is depicted in Fig. 15
at right, where the centres of the disks D ,D ,D ,D and D are positioned at the points
√ √ √ √ √ 0 1 2 3 4
(0,0),(− 2,− 2),(0,−2 2),( 2,− 2) and (0,2), respectively.
6.5. Minimal length for the standard Whitehead link diagram in 
--- END OF 2005.13168v1.pdf ---


--- START OF 2005.13210v1.pdf ---
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS
JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
Abstract. Aboundedcurvaturepathisacontinuouslydifferentiablepiece-wiseC2pathwith
bounded absolute curvature connecting two points in the tangent bundle of a surface. These
pathshavebeenwidelyconsideredincomputerscienceandengineeringsincetheboundoncur-
vaturemodelsthetrajectoryofthemotionofrobotsunderturningcircleconstraints. Analyzing
global properties of spaces of bounded curvature paths is not a simple matter since the length
variation between length minimizers of arbitrary close endpoints or directions is in many cases
discontinuous. In this note, we develop a simple technology allowing us to partition the space
of spaces of bounded curvature paths into one-parameter families. These families of spaces are
classified in terms of the type of connected components their elements have (homotopy classes,
isotopy classes, or isolated points) as we vary a parameter defined in the reals. Consequently,
we answer a question raised by Dubins (Pac J Math 11(2):471481, 1961).
1. Prelude
It is well known that any two plane curves both closed or with different endpoints are homo-
topic. Graustein, and Whitney in 1937, independently proved that not any two planar closed
curves are regularly homotopic (homotopic through immersions) [31]. Markov in 1857 consid-
ered several optimization problems relating a bound on curvature with the design of railroads
[22]. But, it was only in 1957 that bounded curvature paths were rigorously introduced by
Dubins when bounded curvature paths of minimal length were first characterized [15].
Fix two elements in the tangent bundle of the Euclidean plane (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2. Infor-
mally, a planar bounded curvature path is a C1 and piecewise C2 path starting at x, finishing
at y; with tangent vectors at these points X and Y respectively, having absolute curvature
bounded by κ = 1 > 0. Here r is the minimum allowed radius of curvature. The piecewise C2
r
property comes naturally due to the nature of the length minimizers [15]1.
In 1961 Dubins raised fundamental questions about the topology of the spaces of bounded
curvature paths [16]. “Here we only begin the exploration, raise some questions that we hope
will prove stimulating, and invite others to discover the proofs of the definite theorems, proofs
that have eluded us” see pp. 471 in [16]. Fifty years later the fundamental questions proposed
by Dubins were answered through the papers [2, 4, 5, 6]. In addition, the classification of
the homotopy classes of curves with bounded absolute curvature, having fixed initial and final
positions, and variable initial and final directions was achieved in [3].
In this note, we develop an elementary framework enabling us to parametrize families of
spacesofboundedcurvaturepaths. Thesefamiliessharesimilartypesofconnectedcomponents,
being these: isolated points, homotopy, or isotopy classes, see Theorem 8.5 and Definition 8.4.
In particular, we answer a question raised by Dubins in 1961 [16] by explicitly describing the
set of endpoints (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 so that the space of bounded curvature paths starting at
x, finishing at y; with tangent vectors at these points X and Y respectively admits a bounded
isotopy class, see Theorem 8.6 and Corollary 8.7. We conclude by presenting an updated
(parametric) version of the classification theorem for homotopy classes of bounded curvature
paths in [6], by incorporating the results here obtained, see Theorem 9.1. Our results can be
extended without much effort for paths in the hyperbolic 2-space.
1Dubins proved that bounded curvature paths of minimal length are concatenations of two arcs of a circle
with a line segment in between, or three arcs of a circle, or any subset of these. The so-called csc-ccc paths.
1
0202
yaM
72
]GM.htam[
1v01231.5002:viXra
2 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
This article is the culmination of a program devoted to classify the homotopy classes of
bounded curvature paths [5, 6], and the minimal length elements in homotopy classes [2, 4].
We recommend the reader from time to time refer to our previous work [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. We
conclude by presenting an Appendix that can be read independently. This Appendix considers
further examples and questions about computational aspects of connected components, and
deformations of piecewise constant bounded curvature paths.
There is a vast literature on bounded curvature paths from the theoretical computer science
point of view. We encourage the reader to refer to [1, 7, 9, 11, 18, 19, 12, 25, 27]. Bounded
curvaturepathshavebeenappliedtomanyreal-lifeproblemssinceaboundoncurvaturemodels
thetrajectoryofthemotionofwheeledvehicles, anddronesalsocalledunmannedaerialvehicles
(UAV). We mention only [10, 13, 17, 21, 23, 28, 30]. Literature on the topology and geometry
of spaces of bounded curvature paths can be found in [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 16, 24, 26, 29].
The illustrations here presented have been imported from Dubins Explorer, a software for
bounded curvature paths [14].
2. On spaces of bounded curvature paths
For the convenience of the reader, we include relevant material from our previous work in
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Denote by TR2 the tangent bundle of R2. Recall that the elements in TR2 are
pairs (x,X) denoted here for short by x. The first coordinate of such a pair corresponds to a
point in R2 and the second to a tangent vector to R2 at x.
Definition 2.1. Given (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2, a path γ : [0,s] → R2 connecting these points is
a bounded curvature path if:
• γ is C1 and piecewise C2;
• γ is parametrized by arc length (i.e ||γ(cid:48)(t)|| = 1 for all t ∈ [0,s]);
• γ(0) = x, γ(cid:48)(0) = X; γ(s) = y, γ(cid:48)(s) = Y;
• ||γ(cid:48)(cid:48)(t)|| ≤ κ, for all t ∈ [0,s] when defined, κ > 0 a constant.
The first item means that a bounded curvature path has continuous first derivative and
piecewise continuous second derivative. Minimal length elements in spaces of paths satisfying
the last three items in Definition 2.1 are in fact C1 and piecewise C2. For the third item,
without loss of generality, we extend the domain of γ to (−(cid:15),s + (cid:15)) for (cid:15) > 0. Sometimes
we describe the third item as the endpoint condition. The fourth item means that bounded
curvature paths have absolute curvature bounded above by a positive constant. Without loss
of generality, we consider κ = 1.
The unit tangent bundle UTR2 is equipped with a natural projection p : UTR2 → R2. Note
that p−1(y) is S1 for all y ∈ R2. The space of endpoints is a circle bundle over R2.
Remark 2.2. (Coordinate system and angle orientation).
• For the given (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 in Definition 2.1 we consider a coordinate system so
that the origin is identified with x, and X with the first canonical vector in the standard
basis {X = e ,e } for R2.
1 2
• When measuring angles we consider the positive orientation to be traveled counterclock-
wise.
Dubins [15] proved that the length minimizer bounded curvature paths are necessarily a
concatenation of an arc of a unit radius circle, followed by a line segment, followed by an arc
of a unit radius circle, the so-called csc paths. Or, a concatenation of three arcs of unit radius
circles, the so-called ccc paths. After considering r be a circle traveled to the right and l a
circle travelled to the left we obtain six possible types of paths, namely lsl, rsr, lsr, rsl,
lrl and rlr. Paths having one of these types are here called Dubins paths. Note that we are
considering Dubins path to be local not necessarily global minimum of length.
In the following paragraphs, we illustrate through examples the richness of the theory of
bounded curvature paths. Its features come from the constraints these curves satisfy. These
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 3
constraints lead to interesting interactions between metric geometry and computational math-
ematics.
Example 2.3.
(1) Recall that length minimizers are considered for establishing distance between points in
a manifold. This approach is not suitable when considering bounded curvature paths,
since in many cases, the length variation between length minimizers of arbitrarily close
endpoints or directions is discontinuous.
Consider (x,X),(y,Y ) ∈ TR2, θ ∈ R, with κ = 1:
θ
• x = (0,0); X = e2πi ∈ T R2.
x
• y = (1,1); Y = eθi ∈ T R2.
θ y
Discontinuities for the length of the length minimizers happen when perturbing around
Y , see Fig. 1. The sudden jumps in length suggest the existence of isolated points, see
π
2
Theorem 3.9 in [5]. In fact, the path in Fig. 1 left is an isolated point in the space of
bounded curvature paths from (x,X) to (y,Y ).
π
2
The path in Fig. 1 right illustrates a discontinuity after perturbing the final location
to y(cid:48) = (1−(cid:15),1−(cid:15)) for (cid:15) > 0 small. Note that length minimisers may not be embedded
paths.
Figure 1. Examples of length minimizers in their respective path space. The
three paths at the right are the result of small perturbations to the final position
or direction of (y,Y ), for (cid:15) > 0. After applying Dubins’ characterization for
π
2
the length minimizers [15] a simple numerical experiment shows the existence of
length discontinuities.
(2) Spaces of bounded curvature paths have several local minima of length, see Fig. 2.
Consider x = (x,X),y = (y,Y) ∈ TR2 with κ = 1:
• x = (0,0); X = e2πi ∈ T R2.
x
• y = (−2,1); Y = e−πi ∈ T R2.
4 y
Byrecursivelyapplyingthemethodsin[4]forobtainingthecsc-ccccharactarization
for the length minimizers [2, 4, 8, 15, 20] we obtain all the local minima of length.
By Proposition 4.4 in [6] the paths γ and γ are homotopic without violating the
0 5
curvature bound throughout the deformation. The same applies for γ and γ . By
1 4
Proposition 4.3 in [6] the paths γ and γ lie in the same homotopy class of bounded
2 3
curvature paths.
(3) Another interesting feature is that the symmetry property metrics satisfy is in general
violated. For example, the length minimizer from (x,X) to (y,Y ) has lenght π, see
π
2 4
Fig. 1 left. On the other hand, the length minimizer from (y,Y ) to (x,X) has length
π
2
3π, see Theorem 4.6 in [2].
4
(4) The classification of the homotopy classes of bounded curvature paths was obtained
in [6]. A crucial step was to prove that for certain (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 there exists
4 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
Figure 2. Spaces of bounded curvature paths have several local minima of
length. Pathswithmatchingcolorsarehomotopicwithoutviolatingthecurvature
bound throughout the deformation.
a bounded region Ω ⊂ R2 that “traps” embedded bounded curvature paths. That is,
no embedded bounded curvature path whose image is in Ω can be deformed (while
preserving the curvature bound throughout the deformation) to a path having a point
not in Ω, see Definition 4.1 in [5]. In [6] we proved that these “trapped regions” are the
domain of elements in isotopy classes of bounded curvature paths, we refer to these as
bounded isotopy classes. Discontinuities may also occur in the formation of trapped
regions. These ideas will be discussed in subsection 2.3.
Consider (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 with κ = 1. For (cid:15) > 0 small, the spaces of bounded
curvature paths satisfying:
• x = (0,0); X = e2πi ∈ T R2
x
• y = (1+(cid:15),1+(cid:15)); Y = eπi ∈ T R2
2 y
have associated a region that “traps” embedded bounded curvature paths, see Fig. 3
right. More generally, spaces satisfying the previous two conditions admit a bounded
isotopy class of bounded curvature paths, see Theorem 5.4. in [6]. If (cid:15) = 0, the space
satisfying the previous two conditions admit an isolated point, see Fig. 1 left.
(5) Consider (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 with κ = 1:
• x = (0,0); X = e2πi ∈ T R2.
x
• y = (4−(cid:15),0); 0 < (cid:15) < 4; Y = e2πi ∈ T R2.
y
Intimately related to the previous observation is that the path γ shown in Fig. 3 (a
non-embeddedpath)isnothomotopic(whilepreservingthecurvatureboundthroughout
the deformation) to the line segment connecting (x,X) to (y,Y), see Corollary 7.13 in
[5]. In contrast, if (cid:15) ≤ 0, then these two paths are homotopic without violating the
curvature bound [6]. This fact is related with the existence of trapped regions [5]. If a
bound on curvature is not under consideration then, γ and the line segment connecting
(x,X) to (y,Y) are regular homotopic, see Fig. 3.
2.1. Spaces of bounded curvature paths.
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 5
Figure 3. Right: A (zoomed out) trapped region Ω ⊂ R2 obtained after per-
turbing the final position of a bounded curvature path being an isolated point,
see Fig. 1 left. Suddenly, the topology of the path space changes from a space
of paths admitting an isolated point into a space of paths admitting a bounded
isotopy class with non-empty interior. The elements of this isotopy class are only
defined in Ω. Left: An illustration of (5) in Example 2.3. If d(x,y) < 4, then γ
is not homotopic while preserving the curvature bound through the deformation
to the line segment (the length minimizer) from (x,X) to (y,Y).
Definition 2.4. Given x,y ∈ TR2. The space of bounded curvature paths from x to y is
denoted by Γ(x,y).
In this note we consider Γ(x,y) with the topology induced by the C1 metric. It is important
to note that properties (among many others) such as types of connected components, or the
numberoflocal(global)minimainΓ(x,y)dependontheendpointsinTR2 underconsideration.
Next, we make use of the fibre bundle structure of TR2 to describe families of spaces of
bounded curvature paths.
Definition 2.5. Choose x ∈ TR2 and y ∈ R2. Consider the family of pairs x,y ∈ TR2 with
θ
y = (y,Y ); Y = eθi ∈ T R2, θ ∈ R. The one-parameter family of spaces of bounded curvature
θ θ θ y
paths starting at x and finishing at y is called a fiber and is denoted by Γ(x,y ).
θ θ
Whenever we write: x,y ∈ TR2, θ ∈ R, we mean a family of pairs of endpoints so that:
θ
x ∈ TR2 and y ∈ R2 are arbitrary but fixed while θ varies in the reals. Note that a space
Γ(x,y) is a representative of a family of spaces parametrized in the reals.
Definition 2.6. Given x ∈ TR2 we define:
(cid:91)
Γ = Γ(x,y ).
θ
y∈R2
θ∈R
In this note we develop a method for parametrizing the fibers in Γ in terms of the types of
connected components in Γ(x,y ), θ ∈ R.
θ
When a path is continuously deformed under parameter p we reparametrize each of the
deformed paths by its arc-length. In this fashion, γ : [0,s ] → R2 represents a deformed path
p
at parameter p, with s corresponding to its arc-length.
p
Definition 2.7. Given γ,η ∈ Γ(x,y). A bounded curvature homotopy between γ : [0,s ] → R2
0
and η : [0,s ] → R2 corresponds to a continuous one-parameter family of immersed paths
1
H : [0,1] → Γ(x,y) such that:
t
• H (p) : [0,s ] → R2 for t ∈ [0,s ] is an element of Γ(x,y) for all p ∈ [0,1].
t p p
6 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
• H (0) = γ(t) for t ∈ [0,s ] and H (1) = η(t) for t ∈ [0,s ].
t 0 t 1
A bounded-curvature isotopy is a continuous one-parameter family of embedded bounded
curvature paths. Two paths in Γ(x,y) are bounded-homotopic (bounded-isotopic) if there exists
a bounded curvature homotopy (isotopy) from one to the other. A homotopy (isotopy) class is
a maximal path connected set in Γ(x,y).
Definition 2.8. Let ∆(x,y) be a non-empty bounded isotopy class of paths in Γ(x,y). Let B
denote the set of pairs x,y ∈ TR2 for which Γ(x,y) possesses such a bounded isotopy class.
In [5] we proved that B (cid:54)= ∅ by establishing the existence of non-empty bounded isotopy
classes. Whenever we refer to ∆(x,y) we imply that ∆(x,y) is non-empty. In this note, we give
necessary and sufficient conditions so that x,y ∈ TR2 is an element in B. As a consequence,
we answer a question raised by Dubins in pp. 480 in [16]. We establish that B is a bounded
neither open nor closed subset in TR2, see Theorem 8.6 and Corollary 8.7.
2.2. Proximity of endpoints. Here we analyze the configurations of distinguished pairs of
circles in R2. This approach permits us to reduce the configurations of endpoints in TR2 into
a finite number of cases up to isometries.
Consider x ∈ TR2. Let C (x) be the unit radius circle tangent to x and to the left of X.
l
The meaning of C (x), C (y) and C (y) should be obvious. These circles are called adjacent
r l r
circles. Denote the centers of the adjacent circles with lowercase letters. So, the center of C (x)
l
is c (x), see Fig. 5 right. The other cases are analogous.
l
We concentrate on the following configurations for the adjacent circles.
(i) d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4
l l r r
(ii) d(c (x),c (y)) < 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4
l l r r
(iii) d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) < 4
l l r r
(iv) d(c (x),c (y)) < 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) < 4
l l r r
The conditions (i)-(iv) have being used in different contexts through [2, 4, 5, 6]. They give
information about the topology and geometry of Γ(x,y). Note that as planar configurations,
(ii) and (iii) are equivalent up to isometries.
2.3. Trapped regions and bounded isotopy classes. In Theorem 5.4 in [6] we proved that
for certain x,y ∈ TR2, the associated space Γ(x,y) admits a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y). It
turns out that paths in ∆(x,y) are defined exclusively in a bounded region Ω ⊂ R2. The shape
of Ω depends on the initial and final positions and directions in TR2, see Fig. 6.
For a precise explanation on how these regions Ω ⊂ R2 are constructed, we strongly suggest
the reader refer to Section 4 in [5]. We call these regions trapped regions.
It is important to note that:
• Embedded paths in Ω cannot be deformed without violating the curvature bound to a
path with a self-intersection, see Corollary 7.13 in [5].
• Embedded paths in Ω are not bounded-homotopic to paths having a point not in Ω, see
Theorem 8.1 in [5].
• The proof of the existence of isolated points in spaces of bounded curvature paths
was given in Theorem 3.9 in [5]. These correspond to arcs of a unit circle of length
less to π, called c isolated points. Similarly, a concatenation of two arcs of unit
circle, each of length less to π, are called cc isolated points. Isolated points in
Γ(x,y) are bounded isotopy classes with empty interior, see Fig. 1 left, and Fig. 7
left. In addition, bounded curvature paths of length zero are also isolated points. This
observation becomes interesting after recalling the concept of simple connectedness.
Closed bounded curvature paths are not bounded-homotopic to a single point.
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 7
Remark 2.9. Suppose that for x,y ∈ TR2 we have that Γ(x,y) does not admit a bounded
isotopy class ∆(x,y). Then, embedded trapped paths cannot exist. We adopt the notation
∆(x,y), rather than ∆(Ω) as we did in [5, 6], since our emphasis now is on the endpoints rather
than the regions Ω ⊂ R2. We prefer to write Ω instead of Ω(x,y).
The classification theorem for the homotopy classes in [6] required the proximity conditions
A, B, C, and D, see [5, 6]. Next, we redefine conditions C and D in terms of the existence of
bounded isotopy classes, see Fig. 4.
Ω
Figure 4. Examples of bounded curvature paths in spaces satisfying conditions
A, B, C and D.
Definition 2.10. If x,y ∈ TR2 satisfies:
• (i) then Γ(x,y) is said to satisfy proximity condition A.
• (ii) or (iii) then Γ(x,y) is said to satisfy proximity condition B.
• (iv)andthereisnoboundedisotopyclass∆(x,y)thenΓ(x,y)issaidtosatisfyproximity
condition C.
• (iv) and there exists a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y) then Γ(x,y) is said to satisfy
proximity condition D.
In Theorem 8.5 we clarify for what x,y ∈ TR2 we have that ∆(x,y) ⊂ Γ(x,y). To this end, we
group spaces of bounded curvature paths in terms of the type of connected components that
they have.
3. An underlying discrete structure
Next, we describe the coordinates of distinguished points in R2. The configurations of these
points reveal interesting features of Γ(x,y), x,y ∈ TR2. In particular, these points completely
characterize the regions Ω ⊂ R2 whenever they exist.
Consider unit radius circles A and B with centers a = (a ,a ) and b = (b ,b ) respectively.
1 2 1 2
Consider a unit radius circle C with center c tangent to A and B at p and q respectively, see
Figure 5 left. Also, set x,y ∈ TR2 so that a ccc path is obtained. Suppose the coordinates of
a and b are known. Next we determine the coordinates of the points p and q.
Consider the triangle whose vertices are a, b, and c. Denote by θ the smallest angle made
by the line passing through a and b and the horizontal axis according to Remark 2.2, see
Figure 5 left. Here (cid:96) and (cid:96) are parallel to the horizontal axis. Denote by δ the smallest
1 2
8 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
Figure 5. Right: Notation associated with Ω ⊂ R2. Left: The angles involved
when computing the coordinates of p,q ∈ R2.
angle made by the line passing through b and c and the horizontal axis. It is easy to see that
d(a,c) = d(c,b) = 2.
After applying the law of cosines we immediately obtain that:
(cid:18)(cid:112) (cid:19)
(b −a )2 +(b −a )2
1 1 2 2
α = arccos
4
(cid:18) (cid:19)
b −a
2 2
θ = arctan
b −a
1 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
b −c
2 2
δ = arctan
b −c
1 1
c = (a +2cos(α+θ),a +2sin(α+θ))
1 2
(3.1) p = (a +cos(α+θ),a +sin(α+θ))
1 2
(3.2) q = (b +cosδ,b +sinδ)
1 2
By letting A = C (x) and B = C (y) we find explicit formulas for the point p between A
r r
and C and q between C and B, see Fig. 5 left. Observe that the coordinates of c (x) and c (y)
r r
are easily obtained since x,y ∈ TR2 are given.
Analogously, by letting A = C (x) and B = C (y), and by applying the same reasoning as
l l
before, we find formulas for the points p(cid:48) between A and C(cid:48) and q(cid:48) between C(cid:48) and B (see Fig.
5 right):
(cid:18)(cid:112) (cid:19)
(b −a )2 +(b −a )2
α(cid:48) = arccos 1 1 2 2
4
(cid:18) (cid:19)
b −a
θ(cid:48) = arctan 2 2
b −a
1 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
b −c
δ(cid:48) = arctan 2 2
b −c
1 1
c(cid:48) = (a +2cos(α(cid:48) +θ(cid:48)),a +2sin(α(cid:48) +θ(cid:48)))
1 2
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 9
(3.3) p(cid:48) = (a +cos(α(cid:48) +θ(cid:48)),a +sin(α(cid:48) +θ(cid:48)))
1 2
(3.4) q(cid:48) = (b +cosδ(cid:48),b +sinδ(cid:48))
1 2
Definition 3.1. Let:
• w be the rlr path consisting of an arc from x to p in C (x); an arc from p to q in C;
1 r
and an arc from q to y in C (y), see equations (3.1) and (3.2).
r
• w be the lrl path consisting of an arc from x to p(cid:48) in C (x); arc from p(cid:48) to q(cid:48) in C(cid:48);
2 l
and an arc from p(cid:48) to y in C (y), see equations (3.3) and (3.4).
l
Next we make use of the formaulae (3.1)-(3.4) to characterize Ω ⊂ R2 in terms of the
coordinates of distinguished points.
Definition 3.2. Assume Γ(x,y) satisfies condition D. Let Ω ⊂ R2 be the bounded region
whose boundary is given by the union of w and w in Definition 3.1, see Fig. 5 right. In this
1 2
case we say that x,y ∈ TR2 carries a region.
4. Motivation through examples
In narrative terms, here we present facts in reverse-chronology. By considering this strategy,
we are telling the reader “the end of the story” through various examples, with the intention
to motivate the more technical steps and proofs.
We study the fibers in Γ by fixing x = (x,X) ∈ TR2 and a final position y ∈ R2 while varying
the final direction Y ∈ T R2, θ ∈ R. In Section 7 we construct a function, called the class
θ y
range, that assigns to each final position y ∈ R2 a non-negative real number. This number is
called the class value and gives the range θ can vary so that the spaces Γ(x,y ) have the same
θ
types of connected components.
Firstly, we would like to point out that for a fixed θ ∈ R, the spaces Γ(x,y ) and Γ(x,y )
kθ jθ
may eventually be different for j (cid:54)= k ∈ Z. Secondly, consider x,y ∈ TR2, so that θ = ±π.
θ
Since the initial and final tangent vectors are parallel having opposite sense, the pairs x,y ∈
±π
TR2 do not carry a region Ω ⊂ R2. This is due to the existence of parallel tangents, see [3].
Definition 4.1. Considerx,y ∈ TR2,θ ∈ (−π,π),sothatΓ(x,y )satisfyproximitycondition
θ θ
D. Let
• ω be the smallest value in (−π,π) so that there exits a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y );
− θ
• ω be the greatest value in (−π,π) so that there exits a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y ).
+ θ
An interval whose endpoints are ω and ω is denoted by I(y). We refer to ω and ω as
− + − +
critical angles.
Remark 4.2.
• The critical angles ω and ω depend on y ∈ R2 since in Remark 2.2 we established
− +
that (x,X) ∈ TR2 is fixed. Sometimes we write ω = ω (y) and ω = ω (y).
− − − −
• From the way we construct the class range function (see Definition 7.1) the existence of
ω and ω is guaranteed.
− +
Theexamplesin4.3andtheillustrationsinFig. 6havebeenobtainedcomputationally[14]by
evaluating the class range function in Definition 7.1 via equations (7.7) and (7.8). Throughout
this note, whenever we consider examples obtained computationally, angles will be measured
in degrees. The following ideas will be formalized in Sections 7 and 8, compare Definition 8.4.
Example 4.3 (parametrizing fibers). In Fig. 6 top, we show a sequence for the variation
of x,y ∈ TR2 while θ ranges over I(y) (cid:40) (−180◦,180◦) illustrating the following example.
θ
Consider x = (0,0) ∈ R2, X = (1,0) ∈ T R2, y = (2.82,0) ∈ R2,Y = eiθ ∈ T R2. We
x θ y
determine that I(y) = [−109.47◦,109.47◦] and conclude that Γ(x,y ) admits (from left to right
θ
and counterclockwise) spaces of bounded curvature paths being:
10 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
• An isolated point for θ = −109.47◦, see Theorem 3.9 in [5].
• There exists a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y ) for θ ∈ (−109.47◦,109.47◦) i.e., a one-
θ
parameter family of bounded isotopy classes, see Theorem 8.3. Also see Theorem 8.1 in
[5].
• An isolated point for θ = 109.47◦.
• If θ ∈/ [−109.47◦,109.47◦] then there is no bounded ∆(x,y ).
θ
In this case we say that Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type I.
θ
Figure 6. The grey regions are examples of Ω ⊂ R2. We illustrate the examples
in Remark 4.3 computed and plotted according to Definition 7.1 via equations
(7.7) and (7.8). The range where θ can vary is depicted in dark green.
In Fig. 6 middle we show a sequence for the variation of x,y ∈ TR2 while θ ranges over
θ
I(y) (cid:40) (−180◦,180◦) illustrating the following example.
Consider x = (0,0) ∈ R2, X = (1,0) ∈ T R2, y = (2.5,−2) ∈ R2, Y = eiθ ∈ T R2. We
x θ y
determine that I(y) = [−48.36◦,30.30◦) and conclude that Γ(x,y ) contains (from left to right
θ
and counterclockwise) spaces of bounded curvature paths such that:
• There exists a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y ) for θ ∈ [−48.36◦,30.30◦) i.e., a one-
θ
parameter family of bounded isotopy classes.
• An isolated point for θ = 30.30◦.
• If θ ∈/ [−48.36◦,30.30◦) then there is no bounded ∆(x,y ).
θ
In this case we say that Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type II.
θ
In Fig. 6 bottom we show a sequence for the variation of x,y ∈ TR2 while θ ranges over
θ
I(y) (cid:40) (−180◦,180◦) illustrating the following example.
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 11
Consider x = (0,0) ∈ R2, X = (1,0) ∈ T R2, y = (3,0.5) ∈ R2 and Y = eiθ ∈ T R2 we
x θ y
determine that I(y) = [−80.42◦,60.55◦] and conclude that Γ(x,y ) contains (from left to right
θ
and counterclockwise) spaces of bounded curvature paths being:
• There exists a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y ) for θ ∈ [−80.42◦,60.55◦] i.e., a one-
θ
parameter family of bounded isotopy classes.
• If θ ∈/ [−80.42◦,60.55◦] then there is no bounded ∆(x,y ).
θ
In this case we say that Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type III.
θ
There are two more types of fibers, these will be discussed in Definition 8.4.
In Section 8 we characterize a region B ⊂ R2 so that the class range is well defined. This
plane region corresponds exactly to the location for the final positions y ∈ R2 so that Γ(x,y )
θ
admits a family of bounded isotopy classes of bounded curvature paths.
Next we explain two types of configurations that will be of relevance when determining the
extreme values of the class range function.
5. Topological transitions
Consider a cc isolated point as shown in Fig. 7 left. After a small clockwise continuous
perturbation on the final direction (while fixing the final position) the resultant endpoints
define a space that does not admit an isolated point, see Fig. 7 middle and right. This is true
since the paths at middle and right (the length minimisers in their respective space) are parallel
homotopic to paths of arbitrary length due to the existence of parallel tangents, see Corollary
3.4 and Proposition 3.8 in [3]. By Corollary 7.13 in [5] these paths are not elements in bounded
isotopy classes.
It is fairly easy to see that a small counterclockwise perturbation on the final direction of the
cc isolated point in Fig. 7 leads to spaces admitting a bounded isotopy class.
(1) For certain fibers, the cc isolated points are transitions between spaces with different
types of connected components.
The previous observations say implicitly that for certain fibers the critical values ω and ω
− +
are achieved at spaces admitting cc isolated points.
Figure 7. Two types of discontinuities. When varying the final vector of an
isolated point (at the left) we obtain a length discontinuity. The third path
shows that length discontinuities not only happen when perturbing directions of
isolated points. Here x = (0,0) ∈ R2, X = (1,0) ∈ T R2, y = (2,2) ∈ R2, and
x
eiθ = Y ∈ T R2 with θ = 0◦, θ = −6◦, θ = −12◦.
θ y 0 1 2
Recall that a necessary condition for the existence of a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y) is that
x,y ∈ TR2 satisfy:
d(c (x),c (y)) < 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) < 4.
l l r r
This is easy to see since: if d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4, then a unit disk can be placed in the line
l l
joining c (x) to c (y) without overlapping with C (x) or C (y). This implies that bounded
l l l l
12 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
curvature paths may escape Ω ⊂ R2 (after applying an operation of type II in [6] to the length
minimiser in Ω) contradicting Theorem 8.1 in [5]. For details we recommend the reader refer
to Section 4 in [5]. The same applies for d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4.
r r
(2) For certain fibers, the condition
(5.1) d(c (x),c (y)) = 4 and d(c (x),c (y)) = 4
l l r r
is considered as a transition between spaces with different types of connected components. We
proved in Theorem 5.3 in [6] that spaces Γ(x,y) satisfying proximity condition A, that is:
d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4 or d(c (x),c (y)) ≥ 4
l l r r
do not admit isotopy classes. Therefore, Ω = ∅.
6. Angular formulae
We describe two types auxiliary triangles that allow us to obtain (via continuous variations
of their angles) the values of the class range function. These triangles are constructed out of
information obtained from the given endpoints in TR2. We establish a correlation between the
angle variation in these auxiliary triangles and the types of connected components in Γ(x,y ),
θ
x,y ∈ TR2, for each θ ∈ (−π,π).
θ
Next we consider fibers whose critical values ω and ω are achieved at spaces admitting cc
− +
isolated points as disscused in (1) in Section 5.
6.1. Short triangles. Suppose x,y ∈ TR2, θ ∈ (−π,π) is such that for some θ ∈ (−π,π) the
θ
adjacentcirclesC (x)andC (y )intersectatasinglepoint. Wehavethatθ = ω orθ = ω ,see
l r θ − +
Fig. 8. For θ = ω , construct a triangle whose vertices are c (x),c (y ) and y. It is immediate
− l r ω−
that d(c (x),c (y )) = 2 and that d(c (y ),y) = 1. For θ = ω , construct the triangle whose
l r ω− r ω− +
vertices are c (x),c (y ) and y, see Fig 9. It is immediate that d(c (x),c (y )) = 2 and that
r l ω+ r l ω+
d(c (y ),y) = 1.
l ω+
The obvious observation: A triangle with sides of length 1 and 2 cannot have a third side of
length greater to 3 leads us to analyze the transitions in (2) in Section 5.
6.2. Long triangles. Consider x,y ∈ TR2, θ ∈ (−π,π) so that the adjacent circles C (x)
θ l
and C (y ) do not intersect. We construct the triangle whose vertices are c (x),c (y ) and y,
r θ l l θ
see Fig. 10. Note that d(c (y ),y) = 1, and d(c (x),y) > 3, see Fig. 10.
l θ l
IncasetheadjacentcirclesC (x)andC (y )donotintersect, weconstructthetrianglewhose
r l θ
vertices are c (x),c (y ) and y, see Fig. 11. Note that d(c (y ),y) = 1, and d(c (x),y) > 3.
r r θ r θ r
Next, we look closely at short and long triangles. Their sides are denoted in capital letters
while the length of their sides are denoted in lowercase i.e., the side S has length s .
i i
We keep a certain degree of detail for short triangles and subsequently reduce the details
in the discussions for long triangles assuming the analogy in ideas and notation with short
triangles.
6.3. Angular formulae for short triangles. To avoid confusion, the abscissa and ordinate
in the coordinate system in Remark 2.2 are denoted by u-axis and v-axis respectively.
Using the notaion from Fig. 8 left, consider the triangle whose vertices are c (x),c (y) and
l r
y. It is easy to see that this triangle has sides of length a = 2, b = 1, and c = d(c (x),y).
1 1 1 l
In addition, since the endpoints are given, we can easily obtain the coordinates of the vertices
of the triangle under consideration. By the law of cosines we can obtain the angles α , β , and
1 1
γ .
1
Let δ be the smallest angle made by the line joining c (x) to y and the u-axis. The angle
1 l
δ = arctan (cid:0) v+1 (cid:1) is easy to obtain since y = (u,v) ∈ R2 is given.
1 u
Remark 6.1. (Ruling out indeterminancies). Note that the standard arctan function allow us
to compute angles in (−π, π). Since our computations involve angles in (−π,π) we make use
2 2
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 13
Figure 8. Notation for short triangles. Right: The angular formulae applies
when δ and ω (or ω ) have same and opposite sign. Here (cid:96) is a line parallel to
1 − +
the horizontal axis.
of the arctan2 function that allows us to calculate the arctangent in all four quadrants, see
equations (7.1) and (7.2).
Depending on the final position, the angles δ and ω may have the same or different sign.
1 −
In Fig. 8 left we illustrate the case when δ < 0 and ω < 0. In Fig. 8 right we illustrate the
1 −
case where δ < 0 and ω > 0. Since α and α(cid:48) are supplementary we have that α(cid:48) = π −α .
1 − 1 1 1 1
From the previous analysis we obtain that ω = δ −α(cid:48) + π or equivalently:
− 1 1 2
π
(6.1) ω = δ +α − .
− 1 1
2
Figure 9. A critical configuration for short triangles. Note that δ > 0 and ω > 0.
2 +
14 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
Now we obtain a formula for ω , see Fig. 9. Since α and α(cid:48) are supplementary we have
+ 2 2
that α(cid:48) = π −α .
2 2
We obtain that ω = δ +α(cid:48) − π or equivalently:
+ 2 2 2
π
(6.2) ω = δ −α + .
+ 2 2
2
Here δ is the smaller angle made by the u-axis and the line joining c (x) to y. It is easy to
2 r
obtain the length of the side C .
2
Figure 10. Notation for long triangles.
6.4. Angular formulae for long triangles. Using the notation from Fig. 10 we present the
following formulae:
π
(6.3) ω = δ −α + .
− 3 3
2
Similarly we obtain,
π
(6.4) ω = δ +α − .
+ 4 4
2
We put together equations (6.1)-(6.4) to give explicit formulae for ω and ω .
− +
(cid:40)
δ +α − π if d(c (x),y) < 3
(6.5) ω = 1 1 2 l
− δ −α + π if d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
3 3 2 l
(cid:40)
δ −α + π if d(c (x),y) < 3
(6.6) ω = 2 2 2 r
+ δ +α − π if d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
4 4 2 r
7. The class range
Choose (x,X),(y,Y) ∈ TR2 so that the origin is identified with x as in Remark 2.2. We
consider the formulae (6.5) and (6.6) as starting point for obtaining the class range function.
The class value gives the range that θ can continuously vary so that the spaces Γ(x,y ) have
θ
the same types of connected components. The class value corresponds to the length of the
maximal subinterval I(y) ⊂ (−π,π) so that there is a bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y ), θ ∈ I(y).
θ
Next we express the angles δ and α in (6.5) and (6.6) in terms of generic y = (u,v) ∈ R2.
i i
Observe that δ = δ since both are the acute angles made by the line joining c (x) and y with
1 3 l
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 15
Figure 11. Notation for long triangles.
the u-axis. In addition, δ = δ since both are the acute angles made by the line joining c (x)
2 4 r
and y with the u-axis. Note that tan(δ ) = v+r, and tan(δ ) = v−r.
1 u 2 u
We use arctan2 function in (7.1) and (7.2) instead of the standard arctan function to deter-
mine angles δ and δ , see Remark 6.1. We obtain the following formulae:
1 2
 arctan v+1 if u > 0
  u
 arctan v+1 +π if u < 0 and v ≥ −1

 u
(7.1) δ (u,v) = arctan v+1 −π if u > 0 and v < −1
1 u
   π if u = 0 and v > −1
 2
 −π if u = 0 and v < −1
2
 arctan v−1 if u > 0
  u
 arctan v−1 +π if u < 0 and v ≥ 1

 u
(7.2) δ (u,v) = arctan v−1 −π if u > 0 and v < 1
2 u
   π if u = 0 and v > 1
 2
 −π if u = 0 and v < 1
2
Now we determine the angles α in (6.5) and (6.6). To this end, we apply the law of cosines.
i
Here we are not considering degenerate triangles, so the following formulae are never undeter-
mined.
(cid:18) b2 +c2 −a2(cid:19)
α = arccos i i i
i
2b c
i i
Since the initial and final positions are given, the coordinates of the adjacent circles are
easily obtained. In consequence, the length of the sides of the short and long triangles are
easily obtained.
We can express the angles α as a function of y = (u,v) ∈ R2. That is:
i
(cid:18) u2 +(−1−v)2 −3 (cid:19)
(7.3) α (u,v) = arccos
1 (cid:112)
2 u2 +(−1−v)2
(cid:18) u2 +(1−v)2 −3 (cid:19)
(7.4) α (u,v) = arccos
2 (cid:112)
2 u2 +(1−v)2
16 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
(cid:18) u2 +(−1−v)2 −15 (cid:19)
(7.5) α (u,v) = arccos
3 (cid:112)
2 u2 +(−1−v)2
(cid:18) u2 +(1−v)2 −15 (cid:19)
(7.6) α (u,v) = arccos
4 (cid:112)
2 u2 +(1−v)2
Note that we have expressed all the angles α and δ as functions of the variables u and
i i
v. In addition, recall that in Definition 4.1 we considered the concept of critical angles ω
−
and ω . We abuse notation and define the functions ω : R2 → R and ω : R2 → R. They
+ − +
have been constructed to match Definition 4.1. These functions assign to each final position
y = (u,v) ∈ R2 its respective critical angle ω (y) and ω (y).
− −
We consider equations (7.1)-(7.6) according to equations (6.5) and (6.6) to obtain:
(7.7)

arctan(v−1)+arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−3)− π if u > 0
    u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2

       arctan(v−1)+π +arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−3)− π if v ≥ 1
         u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2 if u < 0
    arctan(v−1)−π +arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−3)− π if v < 1 if d(c (x),y) < 3
  u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2 l
              π 2 +arccos(( 2 u√2+ u ( 2 1 + − ( v 1 ) − 2) v − )2 3)− π 2 if v > 1
 if u = 0
        −π 2 +arccos(( 2 u√2+ u ( 2 1 + − ( v 1 ) − 2) v − )2 3)− π 2 if v < 1
ω (u,v) = 
− arctan(v−1)−arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−15)+ π if u > 0
    u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2

       arctan(v−1)+π −arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−15)+ π if v ≥ 1
         u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2 if u < 0
    arctan(v−1)−π −arccos((u√2+(1−v)2)−15)+ π if v < 1 if d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
  u 2 u2+(1−v)2 2 l
              π 2 −arccos((u 2 √2+ u (1 2 − + v (1 )2 − ) v − ) 1 2 5)+ π 2 if v > 1
 if u = 0
        −π 2 −arccos((u 2 √2+ u (1 2 − + v (1 )2 − ) v − ) 1 2 5)+ π 2 if v < 1
(7.8)

arctan(v+1)−arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−3)+ π if u > 0
    u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2

       arctan(v+1)+π −arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−3)+ π if v ≥ −1
         u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2 if u < 0
    arctan(v+1)−π −arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−3)+ π if v < −1 if d(c (x),y) < 3
  u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2 r
              π 2 −arccos(( 2 u√2+ u ( 2 − + 1 ( − − v 1 ) − 2) v − )2 3)+ π 2 if v > −1
 if u = 0
        −π 2 −arccos(( 2 u√2+ u ( 2 − + 1 ( − − v 1 ) − 2) v − )2 3)+ π 2 if v < −1
ω (u,v) = 
+ arctan(v+1)+arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−15)− π if u > 0
    u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2

       arctan(v+1)+π +arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−15)− π if v ≥ −1
         u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2 if u < 0
    arctan(v+1)−π +arccos((u√2+(−1−v)2)−15)− π if v < −1 if d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
  u 2 u2+(−1−v)2 2 r
              π 2 −arccos((u 2 √2+ u (− 2+ 1− (− v 1 )2 − ) v − ) 1 2 5)+ π 2 if v > −1
 if u = 0
        −π 2 −arccos((u 2 √2+ u (− 2+ 1− (− v 1 )2 − ) v − ) 1 2 5)+ π 2 if v < −1
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 17
The undetermined expression u for u = v = 0 can only happen at the centres of C (x) and
v l
C (x). By Corollary 3.4 in [3], no path in a bounded isotopy class can satisfy the points (0,1)
r
or (0,−1). This is due the existence of parallel tangents; contradicting Theorem 7.12 in [5].
Definition 7.1. The class range function Θ : R2 → R is defined to be:
Θ(y) = ω (y)−ω (y) ≥ 0.
+ −
It is important to note that the critical angles ω (y) and ω (y) are chosen so that ω (y) ≥
− + +
ω (y), see Definition 4.1. In addition, note that ω (y) and ω (y) are in the boundary or the
− − +
closure of the interval I(y). Of course, if ω (y) − ω (y) < 0 we have that I(y) = ∅, and so
+ −
Ω = ∅, and so there is no bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y). The case where Θ(y) = 0 is discussed
bellow.
The interior, closure, boundary and complement of a set B are denoted by int(B), cl(B),
∂(B), and Bc respectively.
Next we present data obtained after plotting the values of ω (y)−ω (y).
+ −
7.1. Facts about the class range function. (see Fig. 12).
• Θ is continuous.
• The domain of Θ is a bounded set B ⊂ R2. In Section 8 we determine B and its
subdivisions. In these subdivisions lie the final positions y ∈ R2 so that Γ(x,y ) are
θ
fibers of the same type, y = (y,Y ), see Definition 8.4.
θ θ
• If y ∈ int(B), then Θ(y) > 0.
• If y ∈ ∂(cl(B)), then Θ(y) = 0.
• If y ∈ Bc, then ω (y)−ω (y) < 0. In this case, I(y) = ∅, and so Ω = ∅ or equivalently
+ −
there is no bounded isotopy class ∆(x,y).
√
(cid:0) (cid:1)
• The range of Θ is the interval [0,arctan 1 2 +π].
4
• Θ attains the minima at the final positions y ∈ R2 for c (or cc) isolated points. Here
we have that Θ(y) = 0.
√ √
(cid:0) (cid:1)
• Θ attains a maximum at y = (0,2 2) with Θ(y) = arctan 1 2 +π. In Fig. 6 top we
√ 4
illustrate the class range for y = (0,2 2).
Figure 12. The graph of the class range function, see Definition 7.1. Note that
the class range is constructed out of (7.7) and (7.8) and that these functions are
obtained by combining (6.5) and (6.6).
18 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
8. Class domain
The obvious observation that a triangle with sides of length 1 and 2 cannot have a third side
of length greater to 3 leads us to study the cases:
(8.1) d(c (x),y) < 3
l
(8.2) d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
l
(8.3) d(c (x),y) < 3
r
(8.4) d(c (x),y) ≥ 3
r
After looking at the four possible combinations for:
(8.5) ω = ω
− +
in equations (6.5) and (6.6) we obtain:
π π
(8.6) δ +α − = δ −α +
1 1 2 2
2 2
π π
(8.7) δ −α + = δ −α +
3 3 2 2
2 2
π π
(8.8) δ +α − = δ +α −
1 1 4 4
2 2
π π
(8.9) δ −α + = δ +α −
3 3 4 4
2 2
The following observations regarding the circles (8.10)-(8.14) can be checked by a mere eval-
uation. We leave the details to the reader.
Consider x ∈ TR2 according to Remark 2.2. The locus of the circle (8.10) is satisfied by the
final positions y = (u,v) ∈ R2 with u ≥ 0. In this case, the angles in the associated triangles
(according to Section 6) satisfy (8.9), see Figs. 10-11. In addition, Θ(u,v) = 0 for points in
(8.10) for u ≥ 0.
(8.10) u2 +v2 = 16.
The loci of the circles (8.11) and (8.12) for u ≥ 0 are satisfied by the final positions y = (u,v) ∈
R2 so that its associated angles according to subsection 6.1 satisfy (8.6). In addition, Θ(y) = 0
for points in (8.11) and (8.12) with u ≥ 0.
(8.11) u2 +(v −1)2 = 1
(8.12) u2 +(v +1)2 = 1
The locus of the circle (8.13) is satisfied by the final positions y = (u,v) ∈ R2 with for u ≤ 0
so that its associated angles according to subsections 6.1 and 6.2 satisfy (8.7).
The locus of the circle (8.14) is satisfied by the final positions y = (u,v) ∈ R2 with for u ≤ 0
so that its associated angles according to subsections 6.1 and 6.2 satisfy (8.8). In addition,
Θ(y) = 0 for points in (8.13) and (8.14) with u ≤ 0.
(8.13) u2 +(v −3)2 = 1
(8.14) u2 +(v +3)2 = 1
The circles (8.15) and (8.16) are trivially extracted out of relations (8.1)-(8.4)
(8.15) u2 +(v −1)2 = 9
(8.16) u2 +(v +1)2 = 9
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 19
Figure 13. Left: The domain B ⊂ R2 of Θ. Note that B is bounded by the
circles (8.10)-(8.16). Right: The temperature give the length of I(y) for y ∈ B.
8.1. Description of B ⊂ R2. We obtain the domain of the class range function by evaluating
(7.7) and (7.8) according to Definition 7.1, this planar set is represented by the colored portion
in Fig. 13 left. In Fig. 13 right we show a Heatmap for the class values.
Definition 8.1. The domain B ⊂ R2 of the class range function Θ : R2 → R corresponds to
the open bounded portion enclosed by the simple closed curve corresponding to the union of
the semicircles (8.11) and (8.12) for u ≥ 0; (8.13) and (8.14) for u ≤ 0; and (8.10) for u ≥ 0,
union the semicircles (8.11) and (8.12) for u > 0, union the origin.
Observe that the semicircles (8.11) and (8.12) for u > 0 are the location where c isolated
points are defined. In addition, Θ is continuous but not differentiable at B intersection the
circles (8.13) and (8.14), see the list of facts in 7.1.
Definition 8.2. Let x,y ∈ TR2. Then
• y ∈ B ⊂ B then, d(c (x),y) < 3 and d(c (x),y) < 3 are satisfied.
1 l r
• y ∈ B ⊂ B then, d(c (x),y) < 3 and d(c (x),y) ≥ 3 or,
2 l r
d(c (x),y) ≥ 3 and d(c (x),y) < 3 are satisfied.
l r
• y ∈ B ⊂ B then, d(c (x),y) ≥ 3 and d(c (x),y) ≥ 3 are satisfied.
3 l r
• set B = Bc.
4
Theorem 8.3. Given x ∈ TR2 and y ∈ B. There exists a family eiθ = Y ∈ T R2, θ ∈ (−π,π),
θ y
such that for x,y ∈ TR2 we have that ∆(x,y ) is a one-parameter family of bounded isotopy
θ θ
classes.
Proof. Consider x ∈ TR2. Recall that the values of Θ are determined by a combination of short
and long triangles, according to subsections 6.1 and 6.2.
Since y ∈ B then Θ(y) ≥ 0, see the facts in 7.1.
Suppose that Θ(y) > 0, then we have that ω (cid:54)= ω . This immediately implyies that Y (cid:54)=
− + ω−
Y . We conclude that the bounded classes ∆(x,y ) (cid:54)= ∆(x,y ). Since θ is continuous, by
ω+ ω− ω+
the intermediate value theorem the result follows. If Θ(y) = 0 then ∆(x,y ) is a c isolated
θ
point with I(y) being a single point. (cid:3)
20 JEAN D´IAZ AND JOSE´ AYALA
Definition 8.4.
(1) A family of spaces Γ(x,y ) such that:
θ
• for θ = ω we have that ∆(x,y ) is a cc isolated point in Γ(x,y );
− ω− ω−
• for θ ∈ (ω ,ω ) there exists a bounded ∆(x,y );
− + θ
• for θ = ω we have that ∆(x,y ) is a cc isolated point in Γ(x,y );
+ ω+ ω+
• for θ ∈/ [ω ,ω ] there is no bounded ∆(x,y )
− + θ
is called a fiber of type I.
(2) A family of spaces Γ(x,y ) such that:
θ
• for θ = ω we have that ∆(x,y ) is a cc isolated point in Γ(x,y );
− ω− ω−
• for θ ∈ (ω ,ω ] there exists a bounded ∆(x,y );
− + θ
• for θ ∈/ (ω ,ω ] there is no bounded ∆(x,y ).
− + θ
Or,
• for θ = ω we have that ∆(x,y ) is a cc isolated point in Γ(x,y );
+ ω+ ω+
• for θ ∈ [ω ,ω ) there exists a bounded ∆(x,y );
− + θ
• for θ ∈/ [ω ,ω ) there is no bounded ∆(x,y )
− + θ
is called a fiber of type II.
(3) A family of spaces Γ(x,y ) such that:
θ
• for θ ∈ [ω ,ω ] there exists a bounded ∆(x,y );
− + θ
• for θ ∈/ [ω ,ω ] there is no bounded ∆(x,y )
− + θ
is called a fiber of type III.
(4) A family of spaces Γ(x,y ) such that:
θ
• there is no bounded ∆(x,y ) for all θ ∈ (−π,π]
θ
is called a fiber of type IV.
(5) A family of spaces Γ(x,y ) is called a fiber of type V if x = y. In this case, each
θ
Γ(x,y ), θ ∈ (−π,π] admit an isolated point, being a path of length zero. In addition,
θ
there is no bounded ∆(x,y ) for all θ ∈ (−π,π].
θ
Theorem 8.5. Consider x,y ∈ TR2 with x (cid:54)= y.
θ
Suppose y ∈ B ⊂ R2, then:
• If y ∈ B , then Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type I.
1 θ
• If y ∈ B , then Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type II.
2 θ
• If y ∈ B , then Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type III.
3 θ
If y ∈ B = Bc, then Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type IV.
4 θ
If x = y, then Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type V.
θ
Proof. If y ∈ B , the endpoints x,y ∈ TR2 have associated two short triangles, according
1 θ
to equations (6.1) and (6.2). Via equations (7.7) and (7.8) we obtain the values ω and ω .
− +
Since Θ(y) > 0 (see the facts in 7.1) Theorem 8.3, guarantees the existence of a family of
boundedisotopyclasses∆(x,y ) ⊂ Γ(x,y )forθ ∈ (ω ,ω ) = I(y). Notethatbyconstruction
θ θ − +
Γ(x,y ) and Γ(x,y ) admit a cc isolated point each.
ω− ω+
If y ∈ B , then the endpoints x,y ∈ TR2 have associated one short and one long triangle via
2 θ
a combination of the equations (6.1) or (6.2), and (6.3), or (6.4). Via equations (7.7) and (7.8)
we obtain the values ω and ω . Since Θ(y) > 0 (see the facts in 7.1) Theorem 8.3, guarantees
− +
the existence of a family ∆(x,y ) ⊂ Γ(x,y ) for θ ∈ [ω ,ω ) = I(y) (or θ ∈ (ω ,ω ]). Note
θ θ − + − +
that by construction Γ(x,y ) or Γ(x,y ) admit a cc isolated point.
ω− ω+
If y ∈ B , the endpoints x,y ∈ TR2 have associated two long triangles, according to
3 θ
equations (6.3) and (6.4). Via equations (7.7) and (7.8) we obtain the values ω and ω . Since
− +
Θ(y) > 0, again Theorem 8.3, guarantees the existence of a family ∆(x,y ) ⊂ Γ(x,y ) for
θ θ
θ ∈ [ω ,ω ] = I(y).
− +
If y ∈ B = Bc we have that ω −ω < 0, implying that there is no bounded isotopy class.
4 + −
CENSUS OF BOUNDED CURVATURE PATHS 21
If x = y then by Theorem 3.9 in [5] we conclude that Γ(x,y ), θ ∈ [−π,π] admits an isolated
θ
point, being a path of length zero. Since Γ(x,y ) admits only closed paths, they have parallel
θ
tangents, see [3]. Therefore, these closed paths are bounded-homotopic to paths of arbitrary
length, see Proposition 3.8 in [3]. By Theorem 7.12 in [5] none of these paths can be in a
bounded isotopy class. Therefore, there is no bounded isotopy class for all θ ∈ (−π,π). (cid:3)
It is easy to see that there is a natural correspondence between B×I(y) and B. Equivalently
a correspondence between B × I(y) and the elements in x,y ∈ TR2 so that there exists a
θ
bounded isotopy class.
Theorem 8.6. The set of endpoints x,y ∈ TR2 so that Γ(x,y ) is a fiber of type:
θ θ
• I, II, or III is bounded, neither open nor closed in TR2.
• IV is unbounded, neither open nor closed in TR2.
• V is a unit circle.
Proof. Consider x ∈ TR2 and y ∈ B. Since B ⊂ R2 and I(y) ⊂ (−π,π) are both bounded we
have that B×I(y) is bounded. Note that B is not open, sin
--- END OF 2005.13210v1.pdf ---


--- START OF Fabiantesis.pdf ---
Per´ımetros extremos en empaquetamientos de discos
congruentes
Fabi´an Henry Vilaxa
19 de diciembre de 2025
Resumen
Mi investigaci´on est´a enmarcada en el problema del per´ımetro minimo de la en-
volvente convexa de empaquetamientos de discos congruentes. Concretamente, busco
resolver el siguiente problema: Dado un grafo de contacto conexo de discos congruentes
en el plano, determinar si dicho grafo constituye un punto cr´ıtico del per´ımetro de la
envolvente convexa de su clase de contacto. De ser as´ı, indicar si corresponde a un
m´ınimo o m´aximo. En este documento describo y fundamento los elementos esencia-
les del procedimiento basado en el c´alculo variacional que propongo para resolver este
problema.
1. El problema del per´ımetro de la envolvente convexa
El problema central que motiva esta investigacio´n es bastante visual. Supongamos que
tenemos un monto´n de discos del mismo radio sobre una mesa y les ponemos una banda
ela´stica alrededor. Lo que nos interesa es encontrar la disposicio´n (o configuracio´n) de estos
discos que hace que esa banda el´astica tenga la menor longitud posible. Es decir, buscamos
minimizar el per´ımetro de la envolvente convexa de los discos.
En lugar de intentar buscar la mejor configuracio´n entre las infinitas posibilidades (lo
cual es computacionalmente infactible), nos enfocamos en un problema distinto, pero en la
misma l´ınea.
No buscaremos el m´ınimo global directamente. En su lugar, tomaremos un grafo de con-
tacto espec´ıfico (una ”forma”de conectar los discos) y utilizaremos herramientas de ca´lculo
variacional para responder dos preguntas fundamentales sobre ´el:
1. Criticidad:Siposicionamoslosdiscosdeunaformaespec´ıfica,¿Ser´aqueesadispoci´on
entrega un punto cr´ıtico del per´ımetro? (Primera Variacio´n).
2. Estabilidad: Si es as´ı, ¿Qu´e clase de estabilidad tiene ese punto cr´ıtico? (Segunda
Variaci´on).
1
2. Preliminares
2.1. Representacio´n de empaquetamientos
Los empaquetamientos los representamos mediante grafos de contacto. Definimos a un
grafo como una estructura G que tiene aristas E y vertices V. Por ejemplo, el siguiente grafo
tiene vertices V = {v ,v ,v } y aristas E = {(v ,v ),(v ,v ),(v ,v )}.
1 2 3 1 2 2 3 3 1
v
3
v v
1 2
Enungrafodecontacto,losverticesse“expanden”demaneraquecadaunosetransforme
enundisco.Ennuestrocaso,concretamenteenundiscoderadio1.Encuantoalasaristasdel
grafo,serepresentancomoun“contacto”entredosdiscos,esdecir,losdiscosquerepresentan
los vertices conectados por una arista son tangentes entre s´ı.
c
3
c c
1 2
Paranuestrainvestigacion,cadarealizaci´ondeunodeestosgrafosenelplanolellamamos
configuracio´n, y la representamos mediante un vector c de R2n, donde n es el nu´mero de
discos en la configuracio´n.
c = (c ,c ,...,c ) ∈ R2n. (1)
1 2 n
Entonces, si tenemos 3 discos, la configuracio´n se representa como un vector
c = (c ,c ,c ),
1 2 3
donde cada c representa un par ordenado (x ,y ) que indica la posici´on del centro del
i i i
disco c en el plano. En forma expandida:
i
c = (x ,y ,x ,y ,x ,y ).
1 1 2 2 3 3
2
2.2. Espacio de Configuraciones
¿Con qu´e configuraciones exactamente estamos trabajando? ¿Que propiedades tienen?
En primer lugar, nuestras configuraciones:
Son conexas: el grafo de contacto asociado a la configuraci´on es conexo.
Son no superpuestas: ningu´n par de discos se intersecta
Que el grafo sea conexo significa que no puede existir un vertice o conjunto de vertices
“aislados”, o que no est´e conectado al resto del grafo. Dicho de otra forma, todos los discos
deben tener al menos un contacto con otro disco.
Debido a que estamos trabajando con empaquetamientos, no tiene sentido considerar que
nuestros grafos puedan tener discos que se intersecten entre s´ı, por lo que nuestra restricci´on
principal es que todo centro del grafo debe estar a una distancia minima de 2. Es decir, la
distancia del disco c y c debe ser ≥ 2, o = 2 si existe contacto entre c y c .
j i j i
As´ı, todas las configuraciones “admisibles” pueden definirse como un conjunto de grafos
conexos dado por:
D = {c ∈ R2n | ||c −c || ≥ 2,∀i ̸= j} (2)
n i j
En esta definici´on, ||c −c || denota la distancia euclidiana entre los centros de los discos
i j
c y c , y D es el espacio de configuraciones de n discos congruentes en el plano.
i j n
Podemos descomponer el espacio D en conjuntos que contienen todos los grafos de
n
contacto cuya estructura combinatoria es la misma; es decir, “agrupar” todos los grafos que
tienen las mismas aristas y vertices, pero con diferentes posiciones en el plano. A cada uno
de estos conjuntos los llamamos clases de contacto o estratos, denotados como C(G).
Podemos definir una clase de contacto como:
C(G) = {c ∈ D : ||c −c || = 2,∀(i,j) ∈ E(G)} (3)
n j i
2.3. Bordes de la envolvente convexa
Para calcular el per´ımetro de la envolvente de una configuracio´n, es necesario primero que
determinemos qu´e es la envolvente convexa exactamente. Consideramos que la envolvente
son las lineas que forman el per´ımetro exterior del conjunto de discos de la configuracio´n.
Concretamente, es la suma de las distancias entre los vertices que forman parte del per´ımetro
exterior, en orden ciclico, + 2π (la longitud de los arcos de los discos que forman parte del
per´ımetro).
Supongamosqueelper´ımetroconectaunasecuenciadediscosidentificadosporlos´ındices
v ,v ,...,v . Definimos B como el conjunto de pares ordenados de ´ındices que conforman
1 2 h
este ciclo:
3
B = {(v ,v ),(v ,v ),...,(v ,v ),(v ,v )}. (4)
1 2 2 3 h−1 h h 1
Cada elemento (u,v) ∈ B es un par de enteros que indica que existe una conexi´on dirigida
desde el disco con´ındice u hacia el disco con´ındice v.
Consideremos a modo de ejemplo una configuracio´n c = {c ,c ,c }, con contactos E =
1 2 3
{(c ,c ),(c ,c ),(c ,c )}, y centros ubicados en:
1 2 2 3 3 1
√
c = (0,0), c = (2,0), c = (1, 3).
1 2 3
c
3
c c
1 2
La envolvente convexa est´a dada por B = {(1,2),(2,3),(3,1)}. Podemos diferenciar entre
la envolvente de los centros y la envolvente de los discos. Para efectos pra´cticos son esencial-
mente lo mismo, pero en casos como la cadena colineal es importante hacer la distincio´n.
2.4. Funcional Per´ımetro
Con todo esto en mente, definimos el funcional per´ımetro como la suma de las aristas
que conforman la envolvente convexa de los centros ma´s la longitud de los arcos:
(cid:88)
Per(c) = ||c −c ||+2π. (5)
v u
(u,v)∈B
Siguiendo nuestro ejemplo anterior (B = {(1,2),(2,3),(3,1)}), tenemos que el per´ımetro
de la configuraci´on c = {c ,c ,c } es:
1 2 3
Per(c) = ||c −c ||+||c −c ||+||c −c ||+2π = 6+2π.
2 1 3 2 1 3
3. Primera Variaci´on: Determinando criticidad
Cuando buscamos obtener puntos cr´ıticos de una funcio´n, por lo general aplicamos la
derivada y buscamos los puntos donde esta sea hace cero o se indetermina. Como nuestra
funcio´n depende de multiples variables (los 2n valores que representan la configuracio´n),
4
utilizamos la derivada direccional, que nos indica la tasa de cambio de la funci´on en una
direccio´n que nosotros especifiquemos. Esa “direccio´n” la representamos mediante un vector
δc, que en la pra´ctica representa una perturbacio´n a la configuracio´n tal que la forma en la
que los discos estaban inicialmente dispuestos cambie un poco.
Concretamente, buscamos configuraciones de C(G) tales que para cualquier variacio´n ad-
misible δc que mantenga la configuracio´n dentro de la clase de contacto, la primera variacio´n
del per´ımetro sea cero:
DPer(c)[δc] = 0. (6)
3.1. ¿Qu´e es una variacio´n admisible?
Cuando hablamos deuna variacio´n o movimientoadmisible, nos referimos auna pertur-
bacio´n que si bien modifica la posici´on inicial de los discos, mantiene los contactos originales
entre ellos. Dicho de otra forma, la configuracio´n resultante de aplicar la variaci´on debe se-
guir perteneciendo a la misma clase de contacto C(G).
Todo el conjunto de variaciones admisibles constituye un subespacio vectorial de R2n,
denotado como T C(G), y llamado el espacio tangente a la clase de contacto C(G) en el
c
punto c. Este espacio representa todas las posibles direcciones en las que podemos movernos
desde la configuraci´on c sin salir de la clase de contacto.
Debido a que fisicamente estos movimientos se corresponden con la idea de “rodar”
un disco por sobre otro, en adelante denotaremos a este espacio Roll(c). Para calcularlo,
utilizamos las restricciones de contacto sobre las que hablamos antes:
||c −c || = 2, ∀(i,j) ∈ E(G).
i j
y las derivaremos. Esto nos da un sistema de ecuaciones lineales que podemos representar
como una matriz. El kernel de esta matriz es precisamente el espacio tangente.
3.2. El gradiente y el espacio tangente
El gradiente de una funcio´n es un vector que apunta en la direcci´on de mayor aumento
de la funci´on. Convenientemente, el gradiente es una herramienta muy u´til para saber “hacia
donde podemos movernos” dentro de una funci´on con restricciones.
Supongamos que tenemos una funci´on que define una esfera de radio 3:
f(x,y,z) = x2 +y2 +z2 = 9.
Si nos ubicamos en un punto arbitrario de la esfera, y decidimos movernos permanentemen-
te en linea recta en alguna direccio´n... eventualmente nuestros pies saldra´n de la esfera, y
quedaremos flotando.
Aqu´ı es donde entra el concepto de planitud local. Si hicieramos un zoom potente al
punto en el que estamos parados, la superficie de la esfera se ver´ıa perfectamente plana.
Este “plano” imaginario sobre el que podemos movernos infinitesimalmente sin salir de la
5
esfera es el Espacio Tangente a la esfera en ese punto.
Lo que queremos es encontrar los movimientos que nos permitan permanecer sobre la
superficie de la esfera. Para ello, utilizamos el gradiente ∇f:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
∂f ∂f ∂f
∇f(x,y,z) = , , = (2x,2y,2z).
∂x ∂y ∂z
El gradiente apunta en la direccio´n perpendicular al Espacio Tangente en el punto (x,y,z).
Por lo tanto, si queremos movernos sobre ese “suelo” sin salirnos, el movimiento debe ser
perpendicular al gradiente. Es decir, si δc = (δx,δy,δz) es nuestro movimiento, entonces
debe cumplirse que:
∇f(x,y,z)·δc = 0.
Esto asegura que el movimiento es v´alido “instantaneamente”; si queremos movimientos
largos, debemos recalcular el plano en cada paso.
3.3. La Matriz de Contacto
Llevando el ejemplo del gradiente a nuestras restricciones, tenemos que cada restriccio´n
de contacto entre dos discos c y c forma una superficie cuya interseccio´n restringe las di-
i j
reccionesenlasquepodemosperturbarlaconfiguraci´onsinsalirdelaclasedecontactoC(G).
Al calcular el gradiente de cada una de estas funciones de restricci´on, obtenemos un
conjunto de vectores que representan las direcciones en las que la distancia entre los discos
c y c cambia m´as r´apidamente. Estos vectores forman las filas de una matriz llamada la
i j
Matriz de Contacto A(c). Cada fila de A(c) corresponde a una restriccio´n de contacto, y
cada columna corresponde a una coordenada de los discos en la configuraci´on.
El espacio tangente Roll(c) es entonces el nu´cleo (kernel) de la Matriz de Contacto:
Roll(c) = ker(A(c)) = T C(G).
c
Esto significa que cualquier vector δc en el espacio tangente satisface la ecuacio´n
A(c)·δc = 0. (7)
Es decir, las variaciones admisibles son aquellas que no alteran las restricciones de con-
tacto impuestas por el grafo G.
Siguiendo esta definici´on, la matriz de contacto A tiene la forma:
 
∇h(c)
1
A(c) =


∇h(c) 2

 ... 
∇h(c)
n
Donde cada ∇h(c) = ||c −c ||−2 es el gradiente de la funcio´n de restricci´on correspon-
k j i
diente al contacto entre dos discos c y c .
i j
6
3.3.1. Deduccio´n geom´etrica del gradiente de restricciones
En nuestro estudio, en lugar de derivar anal´ıticamente cada funcio´n de restricci´on para
obtener su gradiente, utilizamos las caracteristicas geom´etricas de los discos en contacto para
deducir la estructura del gradiente.
Consideremos dos discos en contacto, c y c y definamos el vector unitario que apunta en
i j
la direccio´n del contacto como u = cj−ci . Si aplicamos perturbaciones infinitesimales δc
ij ||cj−ci|| i
y δc a los centros de los discos, la unica manera de que el contacto se mantenga es que los
j
desplazamientos a lo largo de la l´ınea que une los centros se cancelen mutuamente. Es decir,
la proyeccio´n del movimiento de c sobre u debe ser igual a la proyeccio´n del movimiento
i ij
de c sobre u :
j ij
⟨u ,δc ⟩ = ⟨u ,δc ⟩.
ij j ij i
Ilustramos esta condicio´n en la siguiente figura:
δc
i
p i p j
c c
i j
u δc
ij j
Donde p = ⟨u ,δc ⟩ y p = ⟨u ,δc ⟩ son las proyecciones de las perturbaciones sobre el
i ij i j ij j
vector unitario u .
ij
Si reordenamos los t´erminos, obtenemos:
⟨u ,δc ⟩−⟨u ,δc ⟩ = 0 ⇒ ⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0. (8)
ij j ij i ij j i
Que constituye exactamente el gradiente de la restriccio´n de contacto entre los discos c
i
y c . Al expandir el producto interno:
j
⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = u ·δc −u ·δc = 0,
ij j i ij j ij i
se revela que los coeficientes que acompan˜an a las variaciones de la restriccio´n son −u para
ij
el disco c y +u para el disco c .
i ij j
3.3.2. Estructura de la Matriz de Contacto
Considerando lo anterior, si descomponemos el vector unitario u en sus componentes:
ij
(cid:34) (cid:35)
c −c
ux
j i ij
u = = ,
ij ||c −c || uy
j i ij
7
podemos expresar expl´ıcitamente la estructura de la fila k de la matriz A(c). Recordemos
primero que el vector de configuracio´n c intercala las coordenadas x e y de cada disco:
c = (...,x ,y ,...,x ,y ,...).
i i j j
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
ci cj
Si existe una restriccio´n de contacto entre los discos c y c , entonces la fila correspondiente
i j
de la matriz de contacto A(c) se define como:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
row(A(c)) = ···0··· ,−ux, −uy ,···0··· , ux, uy ,···0··· . (9)
k ij ij ij ij
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Cols.xi,yi Cols.xj,yj
Notemos que:
Lascolumnascorrespondientesaldiscoc contienenlascomponentesdelvectorunitario
i
con signo negativo (−u ).
ij
Las columnas correspondientes al disco c contienen las componentes con signo positivo
j
(+u ).
ij
Todas las dema´s columnas (correspondientes a discos no involucrados en este contacto
espec´ıfico) son cero.
3.3.3. Ejemplo
Construyamos la matriz de contacto para la configuracio´n triangular. Consideremos los
siguientes datos:
Disco Centro (x, y) Restricci´on
c (0, 0) ||c −c ||−2 = 0
1 2 1
c (2, 0) ||c −c ||−2 = 0
2 √ 3 2
c (1, 3) ||c −c ||−2 = 0
3 1 3
Tenemos 3 restricciones y 6 variables, por lo que la matriz de contacto A(c) sera´ de
taman˜o 3×6.
Paso 1: C´alculo de vectores unitarios
Primero calculamos los vectores de direcci´on u para cada contacto:
ij
c −c
2 1
u = = (1,0)
12
||c −c ||
2 1
(cid:32) √ (cid:33)
c −c 1 3
3 2
u = = − ,
23
||c −c || 2 2
3 2
(cid:32) √ (cid:33)
c −c 1 3
1 3
u = = − ,−
31
||c −c || 2 2
1 3
8
Paso 2: Construccio´n de las filas
Aplicando la estructura definida en la ecuacio´n (9), ensamblamos cada fila asignando los
componentes negativos y positivos a las columnas de los discos correspondientes:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
row(A) = −1, 0, 1, 0 , 0, 0
1
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
Cols.c1 Cols.c2
√ √
(cid:104) 1 3 1 3 (cid:105)
row(A) = 0, 0, , − , − ,
2
2 2 2 2
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Cols.c2 Cols.c3
√ √
(cid:104) 1 3 1 3 (cid:105)
row(A) = − , − , 0, 0, ,
3
2 2 2 2
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Cols.c1 Cols.c3
Paso 3: Matriz de Contacto completa
Apilando estas filas, obtenemos la matriz final. Incluimos encabezados para identificar bien
las contribuciones para cada disco:
 
c c c
1 2 3
 
 x 1 y 1 x 2 y 2 x 3 y 3 
 
A(c) =  −1 0 1 0 0 0 
 
 √ √ 
 0 0 1 − 3 −1 3 
 √ 2 2 2 √ 2 
−1 − 3 0 0 1 3
2 2 2 2
3.4. Condici´on de criticidad
Volvamos a la condicio´n de criticidad (6) que queremos satisfacer:
DPer(c)[δc] = 0
Como ya sabemos que δc es un vector que existe en el espacio de restricciones Roll(c),
podemos reformular la condicio´n de criticidad como:
DPer(c)[δc] = 0, ∀δc ∈ Roll(c). (10)
Esto significa que la primera variaci´on del per´ımetro debe ser cero para cualquier pertur-
bacio´n dentro del espacio tangente a la clase de contacto en el punto c.
¿Cua´l es exactamente la forma de la primera derivada del per´ımetro? La calcularemos
explicitamente a continuacio´n.
9
3.5. La primera variaci´on del per´ımetro
Recordemos que el per´ımetro esta´ definido como:
(cid:88)
Per(c) = ||c −c ||+2π. (11)
v u
(u,v)∈B
Para calcular la primera variaci´on del per´ımetro, aplicamos la definici´on de derivada direc-
cional:
d
DPer(c)[δc] = Per(c+tδc).
dt
Por definicio´n, la forma de la derivada direccional en nuestro caso es:
DPer(c)[δc] = ⟨∇Per(c),δc⟩. (12)
Procederemos a calcular la derivada expl´ıcitamente.
Al sustituir el parametro c+tδc en la expresio´n del per´ımetro, obtenemos:
(cid:88)
Per(c+tδc) = ||(c +tδc )−(c +tδc )||+2π.
v v u u
(u,v)∈B
Y luego, la forma de la derivada es:
d d (cid:88)
Per(c+tδc) = ||(c +tδc )−(c +tδc )||.
v v u u
dt dt
(u,v)∈B
Sabemos que la derivada de la sumatoria es la suma de las derivadas, por lo que podemos
centrarnos solo en:
d
||(c +tδc )−(c +tδc )||.
v v u u
dt
Para conveniencia, reordenaremos los terminos para que separar los c de los δc:
d
||(c −c )+t(δc −δc )||.
v u v u
dt
Y hacemos que x = (c −c )+t(δc −δc ):
v u v u
d d (cid:112)
||x(t)|| = x (t)2 +x (t)2.
1 2
dt dt
Por regla de la cadena (f(g(x))’ = f’(g(x))g’(x)):
d 1
||x(t)|| = (x (t)2 +x (t)2)−1 ·2(x (t)x′(t)+x (t)x′(t)).
dt 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2
Simplificamos la fracci´on y reescribimos:
d x (t)x′(t)+x (t)x′(t)
||x(t)|| = 1 1 2 2 .
dt ||x(t)||
10
Notamos que el numerador tiene la forma de un producto interno (a b +a b = ⟨a,b⟩):
1 1 2 2
d ⟨x(t),x′(t)⟩
||x(t)|| = .
dt ||x(t)||
La bilinealidad del producto interno nos permite escribir:
(cid:28) (cid:29)
d x(t)
||x(t)|| = ,x′(t) .
dt ||x(t)||
Finalmente, recordamos que x(t) = (c −c )+t(δc −δc ) y x′(t) = (δc −δc ), por lo que:
v u v u v u
(cid:28) (cid:29)
d (c −c )+t(δc −δc )
v u v u
||(c +tδc )−(c +tδc )|| = ,(δc −δc ) .
v v u u v u
dt ||(c −c )+t(δc −δc )||
v u v u
Evaluando en t = 0, obtenemos la expresio´n final para la primera variacio´n del per´ımetro:
(cid:28) (cid:29)
(cid:88) (c −c )
v u
DPer(c)[δc] = ,(δc −δc ) .
v u
||c −c ||
v u
(u,v)∈B
Si consideramos el primer termino del producto interno como un vector unitario t =
uv
(c −c )
v u
, la expresio´n se puede reescribir como:
||c −c ||
v u
(cid:88)
DPer(c)[δc] = ⟨t ,(δc −δc )⟩. (13)
uv v u
(u,v)∈B
Si bien la expresi´on se “parece’ a (12), no es exactamente igual. Para llegar a esa forma,
necesitamos reordenar los la sumatoria para nuestra conveniencia. Consideramos en primer
lugar separar el producto interno en dos terminos:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
DPer(c)[δc] = ⟨t ,δc ⟩− ⟨t ,δc ⟩.
uv v uv u
(u,v)∈B (u,v)∈B
Luego, reordenamos cada sumatoria para agrupar los terminos por disco:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
DPer(c)[δc] = ⟨t ,δc ⟩− ⟨t ,δc ⟩.
uk k kv k
(u,k)∈B (k,v)∈B
Finalmente, combinamos las dos sumatorias en una sola:
(cid:88)
DPer(c)[δc] = ⟨t −t ,δc ⟩. (14)
in out k
k∈V
Donde t es el vector tangente que entra al disco c y t es el vector tangente que sale
in k out
del disco c . V es el conjunto de discos que forman parte de la envolvente convexa. t y
k in
−t permiten representar la contribucio´n neta de cada disco al gradiente del per´ımetro. Al
out
efectuar la sumatoria, la forma final es exactamente igual a la ecuacio´n (12).
Finalmente, tenemos que la condicio´n de criticidad (10) se puede reescribir como1:
⟨∇Per(c),δc⟩ = 0, ∀δc ∈ Roll(c). (15)
1Como (cid:80) ⟨t ,δc −δc ⟩ = ⟨∇Per(c),δc⟩, es correcto decir que la suma de t es, de hecho, el
(u,k)∈B uv v u uv
gradiente.
11
3.5.1. Ejemplo
Consideremos nuevamente la configuracio´n triangular de antes. Recordando sus datos:
Disco Centro (x, y) Vector Unitario t / t
in out
c (0, 0) u = (1,0)
1 ij
√
c (2, 0) u = (−1, 3)
2 √ ij 2 2√
c (1, 3) u = (−1,− 3)
3 ij 2 2
Los contactos coinciden con los bordes de la envolvente convexa, por lo que cada vector
t es:
(cid:16) √ (cid:17)
Para el disco c : t = −1,− 3 , t = (1,0)
1 in 2 2 out
(cid:16) √ (cid:17)
Para el disco c : t = (1,0), t = −1, 3
2 in out 2 2
(cid:16) √ (cid:17) (cid:16) √ (cid:17)
Para el disco c : t = −1, 3 , t = −1,− 3
3 in 2 2 out 2 2
Luego, los gradientes netos para cada disco son:
(cid:32) √ (cid:33) (cid:32) √ (cid:33)
1 3 3 3
∇Per(c ) = t −t = − ,− −(1,0) = − ,−
1 in out
2 2 2 2
(cid:32) √ (cid:33) (cid:32) √ (cid:33)
1 3 3 3
∇Per(c ) = t −t = (1,0)− − , = ,−
2 in out
2 2 2 2
(cid:32) √ (cid:33) (cid:32) √ (cid:33)
1 3 1 3 √
∇Per(c ) = t −t = − , − − ,− = (0, 3)
3 in out
2 2 2 2
Por lo tanto, el gradiente completo del per´ımetro es:
(cid:34) √ √ (cid:35)
3 3 3 3 √
∇Per(c)⊤ = − ,− , ,− ,0, 3 .
2 2 2 2
Lacondicio´ndecriticidad(15)requierequeestegradienteseaortogonalacualquiervariacio´n
admisible δc en el espacio Roll(c). Es decir, la proyecci´on del gradiente sobre el espacio
tangente debe ser cero. Si consideramos Z como una base de Roll(c), entonces la condici´on
se puede expresar como:
ZT∇Per(c) = 0.
Consideramos la siguiente base:
√ √ 
3 1 − 3
 
−1 0 2 
 
√ √ 
 3 1 − 3
 
Z =  .
 
1 0 0
 
 
 
0 0 0
 
 
0 0 1
12
Calculamos la proyeccio´n:
 
−3
2
 √ 
 √ √ 
− 3
 
 
2
3 −1 3 1 0 0   0
   3   
 
ZT∇Per(c) =   1 0 1 0 0 0    2 √  =   0   .
 √ √ 

−
3
 
 
2
− 3 2 − 3 0 0 1   0
 
0
 
 √ 
3
As´ı, se verifica que el gradiente del per´ımetro es efectivamente ortogonal al espacio tan-
gente,confirmandoquelaconfiguracio´ntriangularesunpuntocr´ıticodelfuncionalper´ımetro
en su clase de contacto.
4. Segunda Variaci´on: Determinando estabilidad
Para saber si una configuracio´n cr´ıtica es un m´ınimo, m´aximo o punto de silla, necesi-
tamos analizar la segunda derivada del funcional per´ımetro. El objetivo de este an´alisis es
construir una matriz Hessiana, cuyos autovalores nos indicar´an las direcciones de estabilidad
e inestabilidad alrededor del punto cr´ıtico.
Partiendo de nuestro resultado anterior (15), la segunda variacio´n del per´ımetro se define
como:
d
D2Per(c)[δc] = ⟨∇Per(c),δc⟩. (16)
dt
Similar a la primera variacio´n, evaluamos la derivada en t = 0 y consideramos solo variacio-
nes admisibles δc ∈ Roll(c).
Al aplicar la regla del producto:
d d
⟨∇Per(c),δc⟩ = ⟨ ∇Per(c(t)),c(t)⟩+⟨∇Per(c(t)),c(t)′′⟩.
dt dt
Estodividelasegundavariacio´nendost´erminos.Elprimert´erminoinvolucralosaspectos
euclidianos de la configuracio´n, mientras que el segundo t´ermino captura las contribuciones
de las restricciones de contacto que aseguran que el movimiento se mantenga a lo largo de
la trayectoria curva impuesta por C(G).
4.1. Calculo del termino euclidiano
Cambiamos el punto de partida de la derivada para mayor conveniencia. Utilizamos la
ecuacio´n (13):
d (cid:88)
D2Per(c)[δc] = ⟨t ,(δc −δc )⟩.
uv v u
dt
(u,v)∈B
13
Aplicando la regla del producto:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) d d
D2Per(c)[δc] = ⟨ t ,(δc −δc )⟩+⟨t , (δc −δc )⟩ .
uv v u uv v u
dt dt
(u,v)∈B
(c −c )
v u
Nos enfocamos en el primer termino. Recordando que t = , y definiendo x =
uv
||c −c ||
v u
c −c , calculamos su derivada:
v u
(cid:18) (cid:19)
d d x(t)
t = .
uv
dt dt ||x(t)||
Por regla del cuociente:
x′(t)·||x(t)||−x(t)· d||x(t)||
dt .
||x(t)||2
A partir del resultado anterior, sabemos que d||x(t)|| = ⟨t ,x′(t)⟩. Sustituyendo, y simplfi-
dt uv
cando:
x′(t) x(t)
= − ⟨t ,x′(t)⟩.
||x(t)|| ||x(t)||2 uv
Notamos que en el segundo termino tenemos la forma x(t) , que corresponde a t :
||x(t)|| uv
x′(t) t ⟨t ,x′(t)⟩
uv uv
= − .
||x(t)|| ||x(t)||
1
= (x′(t)−t ⟨t ,x′(t)⟩).
uv uv
||x(t)||
Al extraer el t´ermino x′(t), reconocemos la forma del operador proyecci´on ortogonal:
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
= I −t⊤ t x′(t).
||x(t)|| uv uv
Finalmente, recordamos que x′(t) = δc −δc y ||x(t)|| = ||c −c ||:
v u v u
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
= I −t⊤ t (δc −δc ). (17)
||c −c || uv uv v u
v u
Sustituyendo este resultado en el primer t´ermino de la segunda variacio´n, obtenemos:
(cid:28) (cid:29)
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
I −t⊤ t (δc −δc ),(δc −δc ) .
||c −c || uv uv v u v u
v u
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
= ⟨(δc −δc ), I −t⊤ t (δc −δc )⟩.
||c −c || v u uv uv v u
v u
Al resolver esta expresio´n, obtenemos un escalar que representa la contribuci´on euclidiana.
No nos interesa realmente un escalar, sino una matriz que nos permita construir la Hessiana
del sistema. Por lo tanto, aislamos el t´ermino dentro del producto interno para formar el
bloque:
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
∇2Per(c) = M = I −t⊤ t . (18)
(u,v) uv ||c −c || uv uv
v u
La matriz H se construye posicionando cada bloque M segu´n una regla estilo laplaciano:
eucl uv
14
(cid:80)
Las diagonales de los bloques correspondientes a los discos c y c reciben M .
u v uv
Los bloques fuera de la diagonal correspondientes a los pares (c ,c ) reciben −M .
u v uv
Los bloques correspondientes a pares de discos sin contacto reciben la matriz nula.
4.2. Calculo del termino geom´etrico / de restricciones
El termino ⟨∇Per(c(t)),c(t)′′⟩ captura las contribuciones de las restricciones de contacto.
Nuestro objetivo es expresar c”(t) en t´erminos de las variaciones admisibles δc y las propie-
dades geom´etricas de la configuraci´on.
4.2.1. Multiplicadores de Lagrange
Utilizaremos Multiplicadores de Lagrange para ayudarnos a resolver esto.
Teorema 1 (Multiplicadores de Lagrange). Sea X una subvariedad conocida por medio de
una funci´on vectorial F. Si una funci´on φ restringida a X tiene un punto cr´ıtico en a ∈ X,
entonces existen valores λ ,...,λ tal que la derivada de φ en a es una combinaci´on lineal
1 m
de las derivadas de las funciones de restricci´on:
[Dφ(a)] = λ [DF (a)]+...+λ [DF (a)]
1 1 m m
En nuestro caso, la variedad X es la clase de contacto C(G), la funci´on φ es el funcional
per´ımetro Per(c), y las funciones de restriccio´n son las restricciones de contacto entre los
discos.
Aplicando el teorema, tenemos que en un punto cr´ıtico c ∈ C(G), existen valores λ
ij
asociados a cada restriccio´n de contacto h = ||c −c ||−2,(i,j) ∈ E(G), tales que:
ij j i
(cid:88)
∇Per(c) = λ ∇h (c). (19)
ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
Sustituyendo en el t´ermino geom´etrico de (16):
(cid:42) (cid:43)
(cid:88)
⟨∇Per(c(t)),c(t)′′⟩ = λ ∇h (c),c(t)′′ .
ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
(cid:88)
= λ ⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩.
ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
4.2.2. Despejando ⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩
ij
Derivaremos h dos veces respecto al tiempo. Siguiendo el resultado de la ecuacio´n (14),
ij
tenemos que la primera derivada es:
(cid:28) (cid:29)
d c (t)−c (t)
h (c(t)) = j i ,c′(t)−c′(t) = ⟨∇h (c),c′(t)⟩.
dt ij ||c (t)−c (t)|| j i ij
j i
15
Por regla del producto, tenemos luego que la segunda derivada es:
d d
⟨∇h (c),c′(t)⟩ = ⟨ ∇h (c),c′(t)⟩+⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩.
ij ij ij
dt dt
Evidenciamos en (18) que d∇f(x) es ∇2f(x)·x′. Por lo tanto:
dt
d
⟨∇h (c),c′(t)⟩ = ⟨∇2h (c)·c′(t),c′(t)⟩+⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩.
ij ij ij
dt
Reordenando para despejar ⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩:
ij
d
⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩ = ⟨∇h (c),c′(t)⟩−⟨∇2h (c)·c′(t),c′(t)⟩.
ij ij ij
dt
Notamos que la derivada del primer t´ermino es cero, ya que h (c) = 0 para todo t (la
ij
restriccio´n se mantiene). Por lo tanto:
⟨∇h (c),c(t)′′⟩ = −⟨∇2h (c)·c′(t),c′(t)⟩.
ij ij
Evaluando en 0, y reescribiendo matricialmente:
⟨∇h (c),c′′(0)⟩ = −δc⊤∇2h (c)δc. (20)
ij ij
4.2.3. Matriz geom´etrica de restricciones
Sustituyendo (20) en el segundo t´ermino de la segunda variaci´on, obtenemos:
(cid:88)
⟨∇Per(c(t)),c(t)′′⟩ = − λ δc⊤∇2h (c)δc.
ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
Calculamos ∇2h (c). Segu´n lo que obtuvimos en la ecuaci´on (18), tenemos que:
ij
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
∇2h (c) = I −u⊤u .
ij ||c −c || ij ij
j i
La distancia entre los discos en contacto es constante e igual a 2, por lo que:
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
∇2h (c) = I −u⊤u .
ij 2 ij ij
Sustituyendo en la expresio´n de la segunda variacio´n:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) 1 (cid:0) (cid:1)
⟨∇Per(c(t)),c(t)′′⟩ = − λ δc⊤ I −u⊤u δc.
ij 2 ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
Aislamos el t´ermino cuadr´atico en δc para definir la matriz geom´etrica de restricciones:
H = − (cid:88) λ ij (cid:0) I −u⊤u (cid:1) . (21)
geom 2 ij ij
(i,j)∈E(G)
El Hessiano geom´etrico se construye a partir de estos bloques, siguiendo un esquema
similar al del Hessiano euclidiano:
Lasdiagonalesdelosbloquescorrespondientesalosdiscosc yc reciben (cid:80) λij (cid:0) I −u⊤u (cid:1) .
i j 2 ij ij
Losbloquesfueradeladiagonalcorrespondientesalospares(c ,c )reciben−λij (cid:0) I −u⊤u (cid:1) .
i j 2 ij ij
Los bloques correspondientes a pares de discos sin contacto reciben la matriz nula.
16
4.2.4. Hessiano Total y Hessiano Intr´ınseco
Finalmente, combinamos los dos t´erminos para obtener el Hessiano total del sistema:
H = H +H . (22)
total eucl geom
Restringimos esta matriz al espacio tangente Roll(c) para obtener el Hessiano intr´ınseco:
H = Z⊤H Z (23)
intr total
Donde Z es una base de Roll(c).
El an´alisis de los autovalores de H nos permitir´a determinar la estabilidad. Los mo-
intr
vimientos con autovalor 0 corresponden a direcciones dentro del espacio tangente que no
modifican el per´ımetro. Siempre encontraremos como m´ınimo 3 autovalores 0, correspon-
dientes a las traslaciones y rotacio´n. Cualquier autovalor adicional 0 indica una direccio´n
plana.
Si todos los autovalores son positivos, la configuracio´n es un m´ınimo local (estable).
Si todos son negativos, es un ma´ximo local (inestable). Si hay m´as de 3 autovalores 0,
hablamos de una direccio´n plana.
4.2.5. Ejemplo
Consideraremos una configuracio´n cuadrada de 4 discos en contacto. Los centros de los
discos son:
Disco Centro (x, y)
c (0, 0)
1
c (2, 0)
2
c (2, 2)
3
c (0, 2)
4
Al igual que con el triangulo, las aristas de le envolvente coinciden con los contactos:
Vector Unitario u Vector Unitario t
ij uv
u = (1,0) t = (1,0)
12 12
u = (0,1) t = (0,1)
23 23
u = (−1,0) t = (−1,0)
34 34
u = (0,−1) t = (0,−1)
41 41
La matriz de contacto de esta configuraci´on es:
 
−1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
 0 0 0 −1 0 1 0 0
A =  
 0 0 0 0 1 0 −1 0
0 −1 0 0 0 0 0 1
17
Y su gradiente:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
∇Per(c)⊤ = −1 −1 1 −1 1 1 −1 1
Calculamos los bloques del Hessiano euclidiano utilizando la ecuacio´n (18). Como ||c −
j
c || = 2 para todos los contactos, tenemos:
i
(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 1 0 1 (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 0 0
M = − 1 0 =
12 2 0 1 0 2 0 1
(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 1 0 0 (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 1 0
M = − 0 1 =
23 2 0 1 1 2 0 0
(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 1 0 −1 (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 0 0
M = − −1 0 =
34 2 0 1 0 2 0 1
(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 1 0 0 (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 1 0
M = − 0 −1 =
41 2 0 1 −1 2 0 0
Siguiendo la estructura de ensamblaje que mencionamos antes, podemos construir la matriz
Euclidiana de la siguiente manera:
 
M +M −M 0 −M
12 41 12 41
 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) 
 Disco1 
 
 −M M +M −M 0 
12 12 23 23
 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) 
 
H =  Disco2 
eucl
 
0 −M M +M −M
 23 23 34 34 
 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) 
 Disco3 
 
 −M 0 −M M +M 
41 34 34 41
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Disco4
Sustituyendo cada bloque, obtenemos el Hessiano euclidiano:
 1 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 
2 2
 
 0 1 0 −1 0 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 0 1 0 −1 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 −1 0 1 0 0 0 0 
 
H =  2 2 
eucl  
 0 0 −1 0 1 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 −1
 2 2
 
 −1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
 
2 2
 
0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 1
2 2
Para el Hessiano geom´etrico, calculamos los multiplicadores de Lagrange por medio del
Teorema 1. Consideramos a la matriz de contacto A como la matriz que agrupa las derivadas
de las restrcciones. Luego:
A(c)⊤λ = ∇Per(c)
18
Al resolver el sistema, obtenemos el vector columna λ:
   
−1 0 0 0 −1
 0 0 0 −1 −1
     
 1 0 0 0  λ 12  1 
   


0 −1 0 0 
·


λ 23
 =


−1

 0 0 1 0  λ 34  1 
   
 0 1 0 0  λ  1 
41
   
 0 0 −1 0  −1
0 0 0 1 1
Para cada λ tenemos dos ecuaciones:
(cid:40) (cid:40) (cid:40) (cid:40)
−λ = −1 −λ = −1 λ = 1 −λ = −1
12 23 34 41
λ = 1 λ = 1 −λ = −1 λ = 1
12 23 34 41
Todas ellas son consistentes, por lo que obtenemos:
λ = λ = λ = λ = 1.
12 23 34 41
Nuestro bloque del Hessiano Geometrico toma la forma:
1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
K = − I −u⊤u .
ij 2 ij ij
Como en este caso u y t coinciden, los bloques son iguales a los del Hessiano Euclidiano
ij uv
pero con signo negativo:
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0
K = − , K = − , K = − , K = − .
12 2 0 1 23 2 0 0 34 2 0 1 41 2 0 0
Apilando los bloques, obtenemos el Hessiano Geom´etrico completo:
 −1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
2 2
 
 0 −1 0 1 0 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 0 −1 0 1 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 1 0 −1 0 0 0 0 
 
H =  2 2 
geom  
 0 0 1 0 −1 0 0 0 
 2 2 
 
 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 1 
 2 2 
 
 1 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 
 
2 2
 
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 −1
2 2
19
A continuaci´on calculamos el Hessiano Total sumando ambos t´erminos. Como los bloques
son iguales pero con signo contrario, el Hessiano Total es la matriz nula de 8×8:
 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 
 
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 
 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 
H = H +H =  
total eucl geom  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 
 
 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 
 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
 
 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Para restringir a Roll(c) consideramos una base Z. Al multiplicar esta base por la matriz
nula, obtenemos nuevamente la matriz nula pero con la dimensi´on reducida:
 0 0 0 0 
 0 0 0 0 
 
H = Z⊤ ·H ·Z =  
intr total  0 0 0 0 
 
0 0 0 0
El Hessiano intr´ınseco es la matriz nula de dimensi´on 4 × 4. Esto implica que tiene 4 au-
tovalores 0, lo que indica que la configuraci´on cuadrada es un punto cr´ıtico con mu´ltiples
direcciones planas.
Autovalores de H : 0,0,0,0
intr
3 de estos autovalores corresponden a las simetr´ıas de traslacio´n y rotacio´n, mientras que
el cuarto indica una direccio´n plana adicional, que corresponde a una familia de rombos con
el mismo per´ımetro.
20

--- END OF Fabiantesis.pdf ---


--- START OF Instrucciones.pdf ---
PRIMERA VARIACION DEL LARGO PARA DIAGRAMAS CS
JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
1. Parte conceptual: primera variacio´n para diagramas cs
1.1. Lo que vas a lograr con este documento. La meta es que puedas hacer lo siguiente,
sin adivinar nada:
• Construir la matriz completa L(c) de restricciones lineales de primer orden.
• Calcular el funcional lineal de primera variacion de longitud Φ(δc,ω).
• Decidir criticidad: el diagrama es critico si y solo si Φ se anula en todas las direcciones
admisibles.
• (Opcional) Calcular una segunda variacion (forma cuadratica) sobre direcciones admis-
ibles.
Lo importante: L(c) solo describe movimientos permitidos (primer orden). La longitud entra
por separado en Φ.
1.2. Datos del diagrama cs y convenciones.
Discos. Hay N discos unitarios D ,...,D con centros c ∈ R2 y radio R = 1.
1 N i
Piezas cs. El diagrama cs γ esta compuesto por:
• segmentos rectos (en el complemento de los discos) cuyos extremos son tangencias con
discos,
• arcos circulares sobre fronteras ∂D cuyos extremos son tangencias con el mismo disco.
k
Conjuntos indice (combinatoria fija).
• E = conjunto de contactos disco–disco, cada elemento es un par no ordenado {i,j}.
• T = conjunto de tangencias curva–disco, cada elemento es una etiqueta α.
• S = conjunto de segmentos, cada segmento es un par ordenado α → β de tangencias.
• A = conjunto de arcos, cada arco es un triple (α → β,k,σ ): extremos α,β sobre el
a
mismo disco D y un signo σ ∈ {+1,−1}.
k a
Datos geometricos minimos (esto SI es entrada). Para poder construir matrices y longitud,
necesitas:
• los centros c ,...,c ,
1 N
• para cada tangencia α ∈ T: el disco k(α) ∈ {1,...,N} y el punto p ∈ ∂D ,
α k(α)
• la lista S de segmentos α → β,
• la lista A de arcos (α → β,k,σ ).
a
Convencion de rotacion 90◦. Usamos J(x,y) = (−y,x).
Normal y tangente en una tangencia (calculable desde c y p). Si α ∈ T ocurre en el disco
k = k(α):
• normal unitario n := p −c ,
α α k
• tangente unitario t := ε Jn con ε ∈ {+1,−1}.
α α α α
El signo ε lo fijas para que t apunte en la direccion de recorrido de γ en α.
α α
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57M25, 57M27, 49Q10, 53C42.
Key words and phrases. Knots, links, ribbons, ribbonlength, ropelength.
1
2 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
Chequeos inmediatos (si falla, la entrada esta mal).
• Para todo α ∈ T: ∥p −c ∥ = 1.
α k(α)
• Para todo α ∈ T: ⟨n ,t ⟩ = 0 y ∥t ∥ = 1.
α α α
• Para todo {i,j} ∈ E: ∥c −c ∥ = 2.
i j
1.3. Variables de primer orden.
Variacion de centros (incognita). δc = (δc ,...,δc ) ∈ R2N con δc ∈ R2.
1 N i
Variables auxiliares por tangencia (incognita). ω = (ω ) ∈ R|T|.
α α∈T
Modelo cinematico (esto es una definicion operacional). El movimiento de cada punto de tan-
gencia se modela por δp = δc +ω t .
α k(α) α α
Comentario honesto: esta es la forma mas simple y util para convertir variacion de longitud
en una forma lineal en (δc,ω), y es la que se usa en el protocolo.
1.4. Bloque de contactos disco–disco: construccion de A(c).
Vector unitario de contacto. Para cada contacto {i,j} ∈ E define u := (c −c )/∥c −c ∥.
ij i j i j
Restricciondeprimerorden. Como∥c −c ∥ = 2semantieneconstanteenelestratodecontacto,
i j
la derivada da ⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0.
ij i j
Construccion de la fila. A(c) tiene |E| filas y 2N columnas (bloques de taman˜o 2 por disco). La
fila de {i,j} tiene:
• bloque u⊤ en las columnas del disco i,
ij
• bloque −u⊤ en las columnas del disco j,
ij
• ceros en las demas columnas.
Espacio de rodadura. Roll(c) := kerA(c).
1.5. Bloques de tangencia: construccion de T (c) y T (c).
c ω
Ecuacion por tangencia. Para cada α ∈ T imponemos ⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0.
α k(α) α
Aclaracion para tu duda:
• t SI es calculable (desde p y c , mas el signo de orientacion).
α α k(α)
• δc y ω NO se conocen a priori: son las incognitas del sistema lineal.
• La ecuacion no es un dato, es una restriccion.
Fila en T (c). La fila de T (c) asociada a α tiene un unico bloque no nulo:
c c
• bloque t⊤ en las columnas del disco k(α),
α
• ceros en los otros discos.
Fila en T (c). La fila de T (c) asociada a α tiene:
ω ω
• un 1 en la columna de ω ,
α
• ceros en las demas columnas.
Conclusion. Con esta convencion T (c) = I.
ω
1.6. Operador lineal completo de restricciones: L(c).
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Definicion. L(c) es la matriz por bloques L(c) = A(c) 0 que actua sobre (δc,ω) ∈ R2N ×
Tc(c) Tω(c)
R|T|.
Significado de L(c). Las direcciones admisibles a primer orden son exactamente kerL(c) =
{(δc,ω) : L(c)(δc,ω) = 0}.
Eliminacion explicita de ω. Como T = I, la segunda linea da ω = −T (c)δc. Entonces, en este
ω c
modelo, toda δc ∈ Roll(c) tiene un lift unico a kerL(c), dado por ω = −T (c)δc.
c
3
Correccion importante (esto arregla un error frecuente). No es correcto escribir un teorema de
primera variacion que dependa solo de c y contactos sin usar p ,t y la descomposicion S,A.
α α
La longitud del diagrama no depende solo del grafo de contacto; depende de la geometria del
trazo γ.
1.7. Longitud del diagrama y funcional de primera variacion Φ.
Longitud. Len(γ) es la suma de longitudes de:
• segmentos s ∈ S (distancia entre extremos),
• arcos a ∈ A (longitud angular sobre ∂D , con R = 1).
k
Definicion de Φ. El funcional de primera variacion es Φ(δc,ω) := DLen(γ)[δγ(δc,ω)] evaluado
en una direccion admisible (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
Criticidad en el estrato cs significa: Φ(δc,ω) = 0 para todo (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
1.8. Contribucion de un segmento y de un arco (formulas correctas).
Segmento s : α → β.
Datos del segmento. v := p −p , ℓ := ∥v ∥, vˆ := v /ℓ .
s β α s s s s s
Primera variacion del segmento. DLen(s) = ⟨vˆ ,δp −δp ⟩.
s β α
Usando δp = δc +ω t : DLen(s) = ⟨vˆ ,δc −δc ⟩+⟨vˆ ,ω t −ω t ⟩.
α k(α) α α s k(β) k(α) s β β α α
Arco a = (α → β,k,σ ) sobre ∂D .
a k
Primera variacion del arco. En este modelo: DLen(a) = σ (ω −ω ).
a β α
Nota de sanidad. Esta formula NO produce un termino directo en δc antes de eliminar ω. Si
luego sustituyes ω = −T δc, entonces si aparece dependencia en δc, pero eso es despues de la
c
eliminacion.
1.9. Ensamblaje mecanico de Φ: reglas de acumulacion.
Forma general. Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω para ciertos coeficientes g ∈ R2N y g ∈ R|T|.
c ω c ω
Inicializacion. Partir con g = 0 y g = 0.
c ω
Regla por segmento s : α → β.
• En el bloque del disco k(α) sumar −vˆ a g .
s c
• En el bloque del disco k(β) sumar +vˆ a g .
s c
• Sumar −⟨vˆ ,t ⟩ a g [α].
s α ω
• Sumar +⟨vˆ ,t ⟩ a g [β].
s β ω
Regla por arco a = (α → β,k,σ ).
a
• Sumar −σ a g [α].
a ω
• Sumar +σ a g [β].
a ω
Resultado. Despues de procesar todas las piezas, Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω
1.10. Test de criticidad en algebra lineal (dos metodos equivalentes).
Metodo 1: base de kerL(c).
(1) Calcula una base de kerL(c) y juntala como columnas de una matriz K.
(2) Calcula (g ,g )⊤K.
c ω
(3) El diagrama es critico si y solo si (g ,g )⊤K = 0.
c ω
Metodo 2: criterio de espacio fila. El diagrama es critico si y solo si existe λ tal que (g ,g ) =
c ω
L(c)⊤λ. Esto es resolver un sistema lineal para λ.
4 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
Explicacion para abuela (sin perder verdad). L(c) dice que movimientos pequenos estan per-
mitidos sin romper contactos ni tangencias. Φ dice si esos movimientos pequenos hacen que la
curva se alargue o se acorte al primer orden. Critico significa: ningun movimiento permitido
cambia la longitud al primer orden.
1.11. Segunda variacion: version util para pregrado. Aqui hay una forma correcta y
ejecutable de segunda variacion, sin afirmar cosas falsas.
Idea. Primero construyes una forma cuadratica Q (δc,ω) (segunda variacion en el espacio
amb
extendido). Luego la restringes a (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
Segunda variacion de un segmento. Para un segmento s : α → β con v = p −p y ℓ = ∥v ∥,
s β α s s
la segunda variacion de la distancia euclidea (formula estandar) se escribe como:
D2Len(s) = 1 ∥(I −vˆ vˆ⊤)(δp −δp )∥2 +⟨vˆ ,δ2p −δ2p ⟩.
ℓs s s β α s β α
En un protocolo de pregrado, normalmente se usa la aproximacion consistente de primer
orden: se ignora δ2p y se trabaja con la parte cuadratica positiva:
Q (δc,ω) := 1 ∥(I −vˆ vˆ⊤)(δp −δp )∥2.
s ℓs s s β α
Esto es una forma cuadratica explicita en (δc,ω) porque δp es lineal en (δc,ω).
Segunda variacion de un arco. En este modelo, DLen(a) = σ (ω −ω ) es lineal, por lo tanto
a β α
su segunda variacion en las variables (δc,ω) es cero: Q (δc,ω) = 0.
a
(cid:80)
Forma cuadratica total. Define Q (δc,ω) := Q (δc,ω).
amb s∈S s
La segunda variacion reducida sobre el estrato cs es la restriccion: Q := Q | .
red amb kerL(c)
Comentario honesto. Esta segunda variacion capta de manera limpia la curvatura de la parte de
segmentos y es suficiente para tests de estabilidad linealizados en muchos ejemplos. Si quieres
la formula completa con δ2p, hay que fijar un modelo de segundo orden del movimiento de
puntos de tangencia; eso es mas avanzado.
1.12. Correcciones clave al borrador original (para que no se meta un error).
(K1) Bien: definicion de A (c) como proyeccion de kerL(c). Eso es correcto y es la forma
γ
intrinseca.
(K2) Bien: advertencia de que una matriz centro-solo B(c) no es canonica. Eso es correcto.
(K3) Mal: usar T como “pares de discos que son extremos de segmentos” para imponer con-
tactos. Los extremos de un segmento pueden estar en discos que NO son contactos disco–disco.
La lista de contactos debe ser E, separada de S.
(K4) Mal: derivada de contacto usando ⟨c − c ,δc − δc ⟩ = 0. La forma correcta es con el
j i j i
unitario: ⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0 donde u = (c −c )/∥c −c ∥.
ij i j ij i j i j
(K5) Mal: un “teorema reducido” que da DLen solo con u y n⊥ sin usar ω ni la lista S,A.
ij
La primera variacion correcta depende de los segmentos y arcos via p ,t y del lift (δc,ω) ∈
α α
kerL(c). Por eso aqui la primera variacion se define por piezas y se ensambla en Φ.
(cid:80)
(K6) Mal: suponer que Len(c) = ℓ (d ) con d = ∥c −c ∥ como si todo dependiera solo de
ij ij ij i j
distancias entre centros. En cs–diagramas hay dependencia angular (arcos) y dependencia en
puntos de tangencia. Por eso aqui la segunda variacion se construye por piezas usando δp.
1.13. Checklist final (lo que debes mostrar al final, sin excepciones).
• Centros c ,...,c .
1 N
• Lista de contactos E y verificacion ∥c −c ∥ = 2 para {i,j} ∈ E.
i j
• Lista de tangencias T con k(α) y p y verificacion ∥p −c ∥ = 1.
α α k(α)
• Vectores n y t (con signos ε fijados).
α α α
• Matrices numericas A(c), T (c), T (c) y L(c).
c ω
5
• Lista de segmentos S y arcos A con signos σ .
a
• Coeficientes g ,g y la formula Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω c ω
• Test de criticidad por Metodo 1 o Metodo 2.
6 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
2. Parte nume´rica: primera variacio´n para diagramas cs
2.1. Lo que vas a lograr con este documento. Este texto es una receta ejecutable. Si
sigues cada paso y haces los chequeos, al final vas a poder:
• Construir una matriz de restricciones de primer orden L(c), completamente numerica.
• Construir la primera variacion de longitud como un funcional lineal Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+
c
g⊤ω.
ω
• Decidir criticidad dentro del estrato cs definido por este protocolo : el diagrama es
critico si y solo si Φ se anula en todas las direcciones admisibles, es decir, sobre kerL(c),
despues de quitar movimientos rigidos.
• (Opcional) Construir un test cuadratico Q sobre direcciones admisibles como evi-
red
dencia de estabilidad linealizada dentro del estrato.
La idea clave, en una frase:
L(c) describe que movimientos estan permitidos (segun esta definicion de
admisibilidad al primer orden), y Φ describe que hace la longitud cuando te
mueves en esas direcciones.
No hay magia: todo se reduce a algebra lineal con entradas geometricas concretas.
2.2. Tolerancias numericas (obligatorio). Fija tres tolerancias positivas:
tol , tol , tol .
met geo lin
Regla:
• chequeos metricos usan tol ,
met
• chequeos geometricos de interseccion usan tol ,
geo
• residuos algebraicos usan tol .
lin
Reporte obligatorio: toda funcion de chequeo retorna residuo y su norma.
2.3. Datos del diagrama cs y convenciones.
Discos. Hay N discos unitarios D ,...,D con centros c ∈ R2 y radio fijo R = 1.
1 N i
Piezas cs. El diagrama cs γ se compone de:
• segmentos rectos en el complemento de los discos, con extremos en puntos de tangencia,
• arcos circulares contenidos en fronteras ∂D , con extremos en puntos de tangencia del
k
mismo disco.
Conjuntos indice (combinatoria fija). Estos son datos combinatorios que debes tener en tu
codigo:
• E: contactos disco–disco. Cada elemento es un par no ordenado {i,j}.
• T: tangencias curva–disco. Cada elemento es una etiqueta α.
• S: segmentos. Cada segmento es un par ordenado α → β de tangencias.
• A: arcos. Cada arco se codifica como
a = (α → β,k,∆θ ),
a
donde k es el disco y ∆θ ∈ (0,2π) es el incremento angular orientado (CCW)
a
desde p hasta p .
α β
Entradas geometricas minimas (esto SI es entrada). Para hacer cuentas numericas, necesitas
exactamente:
• los centros c ,...,c ,
1 N
• para cada α ∈ T: el indice k(α) ∈ {1,...,N} y el punto p ∈ ∂D ,
α k(α)
• la lista S de segmentos α → β,
7
• la lista A de arcos (α → β,k,∆θ ).
a
Convencion de rotacion 90◦. Definimos J : R2 → R2 por J(x,y) = (−y,x).
Normal en una tangencia (calculable desde c y p). Para α ∈ T, sea k = k(α) y definimos
n := p −c .
α α k
Este vector debe ser unitario.
Chequeos metricos inmediatos (si falla, la entrada esta mal). Antes de cualquier matriz, exigir:
• Para todo α ∈ T:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)∥p −c ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol .
α k(α) met
• Para todo {i,j} ∈ E:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)∥c −c ∥−2(cid:12) ≤ tol .
i j met
2.4. Orientacion computable: como fijar t sin ambiguedad.
α
Principio. En este paquete, t se define desde la pieza saliente en el ciclo orientado, y luego
α
se chequea tangencia de manera dura. Esto elimina ambiguedades de signo.
Caso 1: desde α sale un segmento s : α → β. Definimos
(cid:92)
t := (p −p ).
α β α
Chequeos duros:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
|⟨t ,n ⟩| ≤ tol , (cid:12)∥t ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol .
α α lin α lin
Caso 2: desde α sale un arco a = (α → β,k,∆θ ). Sea k = k(α) = k(β). En este protocolo,
a
todo arco se interpreta CCW, luego la tangente saliente en p es
α
t := Jn .
α α
Chequeos duros:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
|⟨t ,n ⟩| ≤ tol , (cid:12)∥t ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol .
α α lin α lin
Regla computable para ∆θ (recomendado: no lo ingreses a mano). Para a = (α → β,k,∆θ )
a a
define
θ := atan2((p −c ) ,(p −c ) ), θ := atan2((p −c ) ,(p −c ) ).
α α k 2 α k 1 β β k 2 β k 1
Define
wrap (x) := x+2πm con el unico m ∈ Z tal que wrap (x) ∈ [0,2π).
[0,2π) [0,2π)
Entonces fija
∆θ := wrap (θ −θ ).
a [0,2π) β α
Chequeo duro:
tol < ∆θ < 2π −tol .
lin a lin
Nota. Si necesitas permitir arcos CW, entonces debes codificarlos con un dato distinto. En este
protocolo, todo arco se codifica CCW .
2.5. Variables de primer orden y definicion operacional de admisibilidad.
Variacion de centros (incognita). δc = (δc ,...,δc ) ∈ R2N con δc ∈ R2.
1 N i
Variables auxiliares por tangencia (incognita). ω = (ω ) ∈ R|T|.
α α∈T
Modelo cinematico (definicion operacional). El movimiento de cada punto de tangencia se mod-
ela por:
δp = δc +ω t .
α k(α) α α
8 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
Definicion (admisibilidad cs al primer orden). En este protocolo, definimos que (δc,ω) es
cs–admisible si:
• preserva contactos disco–disco al primer orden: A(c)δc = 0,
• satisface compatibilidad de tangencia:
⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0 ∀α ∈ T.
α k(α) α
Aviso de seguridad. La ecuacion ⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0 es parte de la definicion del protocolo .
α k α
2.6. Convencion para ω (necesaria para DLen(a) = ω − ω ). En este protocolo, ω es
β α α
desplazamiento tangencial escalar en unidades de longitud sobre ∂D , medido en la
k(α)
direccion t . En particular, si a = (α → β,k,∆θ ) es CCW, entonces
α a
DLen(a) = ω −ω .
β α
Esta formula depende de esta convencion.
2.7. Bloque de contactos disco–disco: construccion de A(c).
Vector unitario de contacto. Para cada contacto {i,j} ∈ E define:
c −c
i j
u := .
ij
∥c −c ∥
i j
Restriccion de primer orden. Como ∥c −c ∥ = 2 se mantiene en el estrato:
i j
⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0.
ij i j
Construccion de A(c). A(c) ∈ R|E|×2N tiene una fila por {i,j} ∈ E:
• bloque u⊤ en columnas del disco i,
ij
• bloque −u⊤ en columnas del disco j,
ij
• ceros en las demas columnas.
Espacio de rodadura.
Roll(c) := kerA(c) ⊂ R2N.
Chequeos algebraicos duros. Si U es una base ortonormal de Roll(c):
∥A(c)U∥ ≤ tol , ∥U⊤U −I∥ ≤ tol , dimRoll(c) = 2N −rankA(c).
lin lin
2.8. Bloques de tangencia: construccion de T (c) y T (c).
c ω
Ecuacion por tangencia. Para cada α ∈ T imponemos:
⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0.
α k(α) α
Construccion de T (c). T (c) ∈ R|T|×2N tiene una fila por α con un solo bloque no nulo:
c c
bloque t⊤ en las columnas del disco k(α).
α
Construccion de T (c). En este protocolo:
ω
T (c) = I .
ω |T|
Chequeo duro: ∥T −I∥ = 0.
ω
2.9. Operador lineal completo de restricciones: L(c).
Definicion por bloques.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
A(c) 0
L(c) = ∈
R(|E|+|T|)×(2N+|T|).
T (c) T (c)
c ω
Direcciones admisibles.
kerL(c) = {(δc,ω) : L(c)(δc,ω) = 0}.
9
Eliminacion explicita de ω. Como T = I:
ω
ω = −T (c)δc,
c
y por tanto
(δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c) ⇐⇒ δc ∈ Roll(c) y ω = −T (c)δc.
c
2.10. Chequeos geometricos cs (duros) y chequeos globales de no interseccion. Estos
chequeos convierten tu entrada en un cs–diagrama real.
(C0) Chequeo combinatorio de cs (DURO). Exigir:
• cada α ∈ T aparece exactamente como inicio de una pieza y exactamente como fin de
una pieza,
• el grafo dirigido de piezas (tangencias como nodos, piezas como flechas) forma un solo
ciclo orientado.
Chequeos duros para cada segmento s : α → β. Sea v := p −p y ℓ := ∥v ∥.
s β α s s
(S1) Tangencia en los extremos. Exigir:
|⟨v ,n ⟩| ≤ tol , |⟨v ,n ⟩| ≤ tol .
s α geo s β geo
(S2) No interseccion con discos (despeje). Para cada disco D , exigir que la distancia del centro
i
c al segmento [p ,p ] sea ≥ 1, salvo en discos extremos donde se permite igualdad en el
i α β
endpoint correspondiente:
dist(c ,[p ,p ]) ≥ 1−tol .
i α β geo
Chequeos duros para cada arco a = (α → β,k,∆θ ).
a
(A1) Endpoints en el disco correcto. Exigir:
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
k(α) = k(β) = k, (cid:12)∥p −c ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol , (cid:12)∥p −c ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol .
α k met β k met
(A2) Incremento angular bien definido. Exigir:
tol < ∆θ < 2π −tol .
lin a lin
(A3)Consistenciaconelcicloorientado. Chequearqueelarcoaesexactamentelapiezasaliente
desde α y entrante a β en el ciclo.
Bug tip (arcos). Para un arco a = (α → β,k,∆θ ), exigir tambien:
a
k(α) = k(β) = k, ∥t −Jn ∥ ≤ tol , ∥t −Jn ∥ ≤ tol .
α α lin β β lin
Chequeos globales de no interseccion (DUROS si quieres validez geometrica completa).
(G0) Lista de piezas geometricas. Representa cada pieza como un objeto geometrico:
• segmento cerrado [p ,p ],
α β
• arco sobre ∂D con intervalo angular de longitud ∆θ .
k a
(G1) Segmento–segmento. Para dos segmentos distintos:
int([p ,p ])∩int([p ,p ]) = ∅,
α β α′ β′
permitiendo interseccion solo en endpoints que sean la misma tangencia declarada.
(G2) Segmento–arco. Un segmento y un arco no se cruzan, salvo en endpoints compartidos
declarados.
(G3) Arco–arco. Dos arcos no se cruzan, salvo en endpoints compartidos declarados.
2.11. Longitud del diagrama y funcional de primera variacion Φ.
Longitud total.
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Len(γ) = Len(s)+ Len(a), Len(s) = ∥p −p ∥, Len(a) = ∆θ .
β α a
s∈S a∈A
10 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
Definicion operacional de primera variacion.
Φ(δc,ω) := DLen(γ)[δγ(δc,ω)], δp = δc +ω t .
α k(α) α α
Criticidad en el estrato cs.
γ es critico ⇐⇒ Φ(δc,ω) = 0 ∀(δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c),
despues de eliminar movimientos rigidos.
2.12. Contribucion de un segmento y de un arco (formulas de primer orden).
Segmento s : α → β.
Datos.
v
s
v := p −p , ℓ := ∥v ∥, vˆ := .
s β α s s s
ℓ
s
Primera variacion del segmento.
DLen(s) = ⟨vˆ ,δp −δp ⟩, δp = δc +ω t .
s β α α k(α) α α
Arco a = (α → β,k,∆θ ).
a
Primera variacion del arco (convencion del protocolo). Con arcos CCW y ω como desplaza-
miento tangencial escalar (longitud):
DLen(a) = ω −ω .
β α
2.13. Ensamblaje mecanico de Φ: reglas de acumulacion.
Objetivo. Construir g ∈ R2N y g ∈ R|T| tales que:
c ω
Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω
Inicializacion.
g = 0, g = 0.
c ω
Regla por segmento s : α → β.
• En el bloque del disco k(α): sumar −vˆ a g .
s c
• En el bloque del disco k(β): sumar +vˆ a g .
s c
• En la componente α de g : sumar −⟨vˆ ,t ⟩.
ω s α
• En la componente β de g : sumar +⟨vˆ ,t ⟩.
ω s β
Regla por arco a = (α → β,k,∆θ ).
a
• En la componente α de g : sumar −1.
ω
• En la componente β de g : sumar +1.
ω
Resultado final.
Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω
Version reducida (solo en δc). En kerL(c), ω = −T δc, entonces:
c
Φ(δc,ω) =
(cid:0)
g −T (c)⊤g
(cid:1)⊤
δc.
c c ω
Definimos
g := g −T (c)⊤g ∈ R2N.
red c c ω
Sobre direcciones admisibles:
Φ = g⊤ δc, δc ∈ Roll(c).
red
2.14. Gauge: como eliminar traslaciones y rotacion antes de declarar criticidad.
Movimientos rigidos en el espacio ambiente. Define V ∈ R2N×3 cuyas columnas son:
v(x) : δc = (1,0), v(y) : δc = (0,1), v(rot) : δc = Jc .
i i i i
11
Proyeccion de rigidos a Roll(c). Sea U ∈ R2N×d una base ortonormal de Roll(c). Define
V := UU⊤V.
Roll
Sea W una base ortonormal de im(V ), obtenida por QR o SVD, descartando columnas con
Roll
norma ≤ tol .
lin
Construccion de la base con gauge. Define
P := I −WW⊤.
⊥
Luego define
U := orth(P U),
g ⊥
donde orth(·) significa re-ortonormalizar por QR o SVD.
Chequeos duros del gauge (obligatorio reportar). Reporte obligatorio:
∥A(c)U∥, ∥U⊤U −I∥, ∥W⊤W −I∥, ∥U⊤W∥.
g
Exigir que todas estas normas sean ≤ tol .
lin
Criterio de criticidad con gauge. Define
r := U⊤g .
g red
Critico si y solo si
∥r∥ ≤ tol ∥g ∥.
lin red
2.15. Test de criticidad en algebra lineal (dos metodos equivalentes).
Metodo 1 (coordenadas con gauge).
r := U⊤g .
g red
Critico si y solo si ∥r∥ ≤ tol ∥g ∥.
lin red
Metodo 2 (proyector, robusto). Define
P := U U⊤.
g g g
Critico si y solo si
∥P g ∥ ≤ tol ∥g ∥.
g red lin red
Reporte obligatorio: ∥P g ∥ y ∥g ∥.
g red red
Explicacion para abuela. A(c) dice como se pueden mover los discos sin romper los contactos.
Luego g mide hacia donde quiere cambiar la longitud. Critico significa: para cualquier
red
movimiento permitido, despues de quitar traslaciones y rotacion, la longitud no cambia al
primer orden.
2.16. Test cuadratico opcional de estabilidad linealizada. Esta parte es opcional. La
afirmacion correcta es: construimos una forma cuadratica transversal asociada a seg-
mentos .
Definicion del test cuadratico en el espacio extendido.
(cid:88)
Q (δc,ω) := Q (δc,ω),
amb s
s∈S
donde para s : α → β:
Q (δc,ω) := 1 (cid:13) (cid:13)P (δp −δp ) (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 , P := I −vˆ vˆ⊤.
s ℓ s β α s s s
s
Reduccion a direcciones admisibles. Como ω = −T δc en kerL(c):
c
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Q (δc) := Q δc,−T δc , δc ∈ Roll(c).
red amb c
Luego aplica gauge: escribe δc = U z y estudia Q (U z) en z.
g red g
12 JOSE´ AYALA AND TOMA´S AYALA
Uso correcto.
• Si el diagrama es critico y Q es positiva definida en el espacio con gauge, eso es
red
evidencia fuerte de estabilidad linealizada dentro del estrato.
• Si existe una direccion admisible con gauge tal que Q < 0, eso indica inestabilidad
red
linealizada.
2.17. Plantilla de implementacion (paso a paso, sin decisiones ocultas).
(F0) Entrada.
(cid:0) N, c, E, T, k(α), p , S, A(cid:1) ,
α
con arcos a = (α → β,k,∆θ ) y ∆θ calculado por atan2+wrap.
a a
(F1) Geometria local. Calcular n = p − c , fijar t por pieza saliente y chequear ortogo-
α α k(α) α
nalidad.
(F2) Matriz A(c). Construir filas por contactos {i,j} usando u .
ij
(F3) Matrices T (c) y T (c). Construir T y T = I.
c ω c ω
(F4) Chequeos duros. Ejecutar metricos, (C0), (S1)–(S2), (A1)–(A3) y (G1)–(G3), reportando
residuos.
(F5) Ensamble de g ,g . Acumular con reglas de segmentos y arcos.
c ω
(F6) Reduccion.
g = g −T⊤g .
red c c ω
(F7) Gauge bulletproof. Construir U de Roll(c), proyectar V a V , obtener W y luego U .
Roll g
(F8) Criticidad.
r = U⊤g , reportar ∥r∥ y ∥g ∥.
g red red
(F9) (Opcional) Test cuadratico. Evaluar Q en coordenadas z con δc = U z.
red g
2.18. Chequeos duros: si alguno falla, la corrida no vale.
Metricos (duros).
(cid:12) (cid:12)
• Para cada α: (cid:12)∥p −c ∥−1(cid:12) ≤ tol .
α k(α) met
• Para cada {i,j} ∈ E: (cid:12) (cid:12)∥c −c ∥−2 (cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ tol .
i j met
Combinatorios cs (duros).
• (C0) el grafo dirigido de piezas es un solo ciclo orientado.
Piezas (duros).
• Segmentos: (S1)–(S2).
• Arcos: (A1)–(A3), tol < ∆θ < 2π −tol , y el bug tip de tangentes.
lin a lin
Globales (duros si quieres validez geometrica completa).
• (G1)–(G3) pasan dentro de tol .
geo
Algebraicos (duros).
• Si U es base ortonormal de Roll(c): ∥A(c)U∥ ≤ tol y ∥U⊤U −I∥ ≤ tol .
lin lin
• Si W es base ortonormal de im(V ): ∥W⊤W −I∥ ≤ tol .
Roll lin
• Si U es base con gauge: ∥U⊤W∥ ≤ tol .
g g lin
Chequeo de criticidad (lo que reportas). Reporta siempre:
∥r∥
∥r∥ = ∥U⊤g ∥, ∥g ∥, .
g red red ∥g ∥
red
Critico significa: ∥r∥ ≤ tol ∥g ∥.
lin red
2.19. Correcciones clave (para que no se meta un error).
(K1) Contactos son E, no se infieren desde segmentos. No mezcles S con E.
13
(K2) La ecuacion correcta de contacto usa unitarios.
c −c
i j
⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0, u = .
ij i j ij
∥c −c ∥
i j
(K3) La longitud no depende solo de centros. Necesitas p , t y la descomposicion S,A.
α α
(K4) El bloque de tangencia es definicional. ⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0 define admisibilidad en este
α k(α) α
protocolo.
(K5) El test cuadratico opcional no es una segunda variacion completa. Es un test transversal
asociado a segmentos.
2.20. Mini ejemplo de sanidad (para probar el codigo antes de un ejemplo grande).
Antes de correr un ejemplo grande, corre un ejemplo pequeno:
• N = 2 discos con un contacto {1,2},
• dos tangencias α,β en el disco 1 y dos tangencias γ,δ en el disco 2,
• un segmento α → γ y un segmento δ → β,
• un arco (γ → δ,2,∆θ) en el disco 2 y un arco (β → α,1,∆θ′) en el disco 1, con
tol < ∆θ,∆θ′ < 2π −tol .
lin lin
Verifica que:
• construyes A,T ,T ,L,
c ω
• pasas chequeos metricos, (C0), piezas y globales,
• ensamblas g ,g y luego g ,
c ω red
• obtienes ∥r∥/∥g ∥.
red
2.21. Checklist final (lo que se entrega, sin excepciones).
• Tabla con N, c , E, |E|, |T|, |S|, |A|.
i
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
• Verificaciones metricas: residuos de (cid:12)∥p −c ∥−1(cid:12) y (cid:12)∥c −c ∥−2(cid:12).
α k(α) i j
• (C0) verificacion del ciclo orientado (si o no, y si no, donde falla).
• Chequeos de piezas: (S1)–(S2) y (A1)–(A3), con residuos.
• Chequeos globales: (G1)–(G3), con tolerancia declarada.
• Matrices A(c), T (c), T (c), L(c) (o dimensiones, rangos y normas de residuos).
c ω
• Vectores g ,g y el reducido g .
c ω red
• Gauge: U, V , W, y U , con normas de chequeo.
Roll g
• Criticidad: r = U⊤g , ∥r∥, ∥g ∥, y ∥r∥/∥g ∥.
g red red red
• (Opcional) Evaluacion de Q en coordenadas sobre U .
red g

--- END OF Instrucciones.pdf ---


--- START OF Irreducible Plane Curves.pdf ---
1
T
t
s
D
o
D
c
n
d
I r r e d u c i b l e P l a n e C u r v e s
(cid:3)
J a s o n E . D u r h a m
O r e g o n S t a t e U n i v e r s i t y
C o r v a l l i s , O r e g o n
d u r h a m j @ u c s . o r s t . e d u
A u g u s t 2 4 , 1 9 9 9
A b s t r a c t
P r o g r e s s in t h e c la s s i(cid:12) c a t io n o f p la n e c u r v e s in t h e la s t (cid:12) v e y e a r s h a s
c e n t e r e d la r g e ly a r o u n d t h e w o r k o f A r n o ld , V a s s ilie v , a n d A ic a r d i. T h e
c la s s ic a l in d e x t h e o r e m o f H . W h it n e y ( 1 9 3 7 ) c la s s i(cid:12) e s c u r v e s b y in d e x ,
+
J , u p t o is o t o p y . A r n o ld h a s r e c e n t ly p r o p o s e d n e w c u r v e in v a r ia n t s (
(cid:0)
J S t , a n d ) w it h t h e a im o f (cid:12) n d in g c la s s i(cid:12) c a t io n s o f c u r v e s w it h t h e s a m e
in d e x , u p t o a m b ie n t d i(cid:11) e o m o r p h is m s o f t h e p la n e a n d r e p a r a m e t r iz a t io n s
o f t h e c u r v e .
S in c e t h e s e n e w in v a r ia n t s s t ill d o n o t u n iq u e ly d e t e r m in e c u r v e s , n e w
w a y s o f c la s s ify in g c u r v e s u p t o d i(cid:11) e o m o r p h is m s h a v e b e e n s o u g h t . A
c e r t a in c la s s o f c u r v e s ( s o c a lle d \ r e d u c ib le " c u r v e s ) a p p e a r s t o b e c la s s i-
(cid:12) a b le b y d ir e c t c o n s id e r a t io n v ia r e la t iv e ly s im p le c o m b in a t o r ia l m e t h o d s
in v o lv in g c o m b in a t io n s o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s . T h is s h ift s t h e fo c u s t o t h e
c la s s i(cid:12) c a t io n o f t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s , w h o s e c h a r a c t e r iz a t io n a p p e a r s t o
b e s im p li(cid:12) e d b y a s s o c ia t io n w it h c e r t a in t y p e s o f p la n a r g r a p h s .
R e d u c i b i l i t y o f C u r v e s
h r o u g h o u t t h is a r t ic le , \ a m b ie n t d i(cid:11) e o m o r p h is m s o f t h e p la n e a n d r e p a r a m e -
r iz a t io n s o f t h e c u r v e " m a y b e s h o r t e n e d t o \ d i(cid:11) e o m o r p h is m s ." \ D is t in c t " is
h o r t fo r \ d is t in c t u p t o d i(cid:11) e o m o r p h is m s ."
im m e r s io n o f a c ir c le in t o t h e p la n e e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 1 . A n is a s m o o t h m a p p in g
1 2 R ! f a c ir c le in t o t h e p la n e (cid:13) : S w h o s e d e r iv a t iv e n e v e r v a n is h e s .
d o u b le p o in t - p o in t e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 2 . A ( r e s p e c t iv e ly , n ) o n a n im m e r s io n o f a
ir c le in t o t h e p la n e is a p o in t t h a t is t h e im a g e o f e x a c t ly t w o ( r e s p e c t iv e ly ,
1
c r o s s in g ) p o in t s o n S u n d e r (cid:13) . T h e t e r m w ill b e u s e d in t e r c h a n g e a b ly w it h
o u b le p o in t .
(cid:3)
U n d e r t h e g u id a n c e o f P r o fe s s o r J u h a P o h ja n p e lt o o f O r e g o n S t a t e U n iv e r s ity
3 5
F ig u r e 1 : A n in v e r t e d s u m o f t w o c u r v e s .
c u r v e D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 3 . A s h a ll b e d e (cid:12) n e d a s a n im m e r s io n o f a c ir c le in t o t h e
p la n e t h a t c o n t a in s n o s e lf- t a n g e n c ie s a n d w h e r e e v e r y n - p o in t is a d o u b le p o in t .
s t r a n d D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 4 . A o f a c u r v e is a s e g m e n t o f t h e c u r v e t h a t r u n s fr o m
o n e c r o s s in g t o a n o t h e r w it h n o c r o s s in g s in b e t w e e n . F o r c o n s is t e n c y w e a ls o
1
c o n s id e r t h e w h o le im a g e o f S t o b e a s t r a n d e v e n t h o u g h it h a s n o c r o s s in g s .
N o t e 1 . L e t S t r d e n o t e t h e n u m b e r o f s t r a n d s o n a c u r v e (cid:13) , a n d R d e n o t e t h e (cid:13) (cid:13)
n u m b e r o f r e g io n s in t o w h ic h t h e c u r v e d iv id e s t h e p la n e . F o r e v e r y n - c r o s s in g
1 1 c u r v e b e s id e s S , S t r = 2 n . R e c a ll t h a t S t r is d e (cid:12) n e d t o b e 1 . (cid:13) S
in v e r t e d s u m D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 5 . T h e b e t w e e n t w o s t r a n d s o f t w o c u r v e s is t h e
n e w c u r v e s h o w n in F ig u r e 1 .
r e d u c t io n c u t D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 6 . A a t a c r o s s in g o n a c u r v e is a s u r g e r y a n d s u b -
s e q u e n t s m o o t h in g t h a t s e p a r a t e s t h e im a g e o f t h e c u r v e in t o t w o d is jo in t , w e ll-
d e (cid:12) n e d c u r v e s ( s e e F ig u r e 2 ) .
N o t e t h a t t h e r e d u c t io n c u t h a s t h e o p p o s it e e (cid:11) e c t o f t h e in v e r t e d s u m
p r o c e d u r e ( s e e F ig u r e 2 ) .
r e d u c t io n p o in t D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 7 . A is a d o u b le p o in t o n a c u r v e a t w h ic h a
r e d u c t io n c u t c a n b e p e r fo r m e d .
r e d u c ib le D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 1 . 8 . A c u r v e is s a id t o b e if it h a s a r e d u c t io n p o in t . T h a t
is , t h e r e e x is t s s o m e c r o s s in g o n t h e c u r v e t h a t d iv id e s t h e im a g e o f t h e c u r v e
c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le in t o t w o c u r v e s w it h n o o t h e r p o in t s in c o m m o n . A c u r v e is
3 6
REDUCTION CUT
INVERTED SUM
F ig u r e 2 : O p p o s it e p r o c e d u r e s .
p a r t ia lly r e d u c ib le if e v e r y c r o s s in g o n t h e c u r v e is a r e d u c t io n p o in t . A c u r v e is
if it h a s a r e d u c t io n p o in t a n d a ls o h a s a c r o s s in g t h a t is n o t a r e d u c t io n p o in t .
ir r e d u c ib le A c u r v e is if it h a s n o r e d u c t io n p o in t s .
F ig u r e 3 s h o w s a lis t o f t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s w it h (cid:12) v e o r fe w e r c r o s s in g s .
T h e n u m b e r s a s s o c ia t e d w it h t h e c u r v e s w ill b e u s e d la t e r t o a id in r e fe r r in g t o
t h e m .
T h e in v e r t e d s u m o f t w o im m e r s io n s a lw a y s h a s a r e d u c t io n P r o p o s i t i o n 1 . 1 .
p o in t | t h e d o u b le p o in t c r e a t e d b y t h e in v e r t e d s u m p r o c e d u r e .
P r o o f. E v id e n t , b y d o in g t h e r e d u c t io n c u t p r o c e d u r e c o r r e s p o n d in g t o w h a t e v e r
in v e r t e d s u m p r o c e d u r e y ie ld e d t h e in v e r t e d s u m .
1 2 N o t e 2 . L e t (cid:13) a n d (cid:13) b e t w o a r b it r a r y c u r v e s . A ft e r t a k in g a n y in v e r t e d s u m
1 2 1 2 o f (cid:13) a n d (cid:13) , a n y c r o s s in g s t h a t h a d b e e n r e d u c t io n p o in t s o n (cid:13) o r (cid:13) w ill b e
r e d u c t io n p o in t s o n t h e c u r v e r e s u lt in g fr o m t h e in v e r t e d s u m , a n d a n y c r o s s in g s
1 2 o n (cid:13) a n d (cid:13) t h a t h a d n o t b e e n r e d u c t io n p o in t s w ill n o t b e r e d u c t io n p o in t s
o n t h e r e s u lt in g c u r v e . T h e n e w c r o s s in g fo r m e d b y t h e in v e r t e d s u m p r o c e d u r e
w ill b y P r o p o s it io n 1 .1 b e a r e d u c t io n p o in t . S im ila r ly , p e r fo r m in g a r e d u c t io n
c u t p r o c e d u r e a t a c r o s s in g o n a c u r v e c a n n o t c h a n g e t h e s t a t u s o f a n y o f t h e
o t h e r d o u b le p o in t s w it h r e s p e c t t o r e d u c ib ilit y .
A n y c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e c a n b e e x p r e s s e d a s a s e - P r o p o s i t i o n 1 . 2 .
q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f s t a n d a r d c ir c le s . C o n v e r s e ly , e v e r y s e q u e n c e o f in -
v e r t e d s u m s o f s t a n d a r d c ir c le s y ie ld s a c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
P r o o f. C o n s id e r a n a r b it r a r y c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e w it h n c r o s s in g s ( h e n c e
n r e d u c t io n p o in t s ) . P e r fo r m a r e d u c t io n c u t a t e v e r y c r o s s in g ; t h is y ie ld s a s e t
o f n + 1 c ir c le s . N o w it is c le a r t h a t p e r fo r m in g t h e in v e r t e d s u m s t h a t u n d o
t h e r e d u c t io n c u t s w ill p r o d u c e t h e o r ig in a l c u r v e .
3 7
0.1 3.1 3.2
4.1 4.2 5.1
5.2 5.3 5.4
5.5 5.6
F
le
is
ig u
ft
ju
r e
o f
s t
3 :
t h e
a n
T h
d e
a r b
e ir r e d
c im a l
it r a r y
u c ib
in d ic
in d e
le
a
x
c
t e
in
u
s
g
r v e s
t h e
n u m
w
n u
b
it h
m b
e r .
n
e
3
r
8
(cid:20)
o
5
f c
d
r
o
o
u
s s
b le
in g
p
s .
o in t
T h
s
e
.
n
T
u
h
m
e
b
n
e
u
r
m
t o
b e
t
r
h
t
e
o
r
t
ig
h
h
e
t
F o r t h e c o n v e r s e , w e p r o c e e d b y in d u c t io n : t a k in g o n e in v e r t e d s u m b e t w e e n
t w o s t a n d a r d c ir c le s c a n o n ly r e s u lt in t w o p o s s ib le c u r v e s , b o t h o f w h ic h h a v e
o n e c r o s s in g a n d a r e c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le b y P r o p o s it io n 1 .1 ( s e e F ig u r e 5 ) .
I t fo llo w s d ir e c t ly fr o m N o t e 2 t h a t a n in v e r t e d s u m o f a n y t w o c o m p le t e ly
r e d u c ib le c u r v e s m u s t y ie ld a c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e . B y in d u c t io n , e v -
e r y s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f s t a n d a r d c ir c le s m u s t p r o d u c e a c o m p le t e ly
r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
A n y s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e s C o r o l l a r y 1 . 3 .
m u s t r e s u lt in a c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
P r o o f. E v id e n t , v ia t h e t h e o r e m .
E v e r y r e d u c ib le c u r v e c a n b e e x p r e s s e d a s a s e q u e n c e o f in - P r o p o s i t i o n 1 . 4 .
v e r t e d s u m s o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s ; t h e r e is n o s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s
t h a t y ie ld s a n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
P r o o f. C o n s id e r a n n - c r o s s in g r e d u c ib le c u r v e w it h m r e d u c t io n p o in t s . P e r fo r m
t h e r e d u c t io n c u t a t e v e r y r e d u c t io n p o in t ; t h is m u s t y ie ld m + 1 c u r v e s , a n d
b y N o t e 2 , n o c r o s s in g s o n a n y o f t h e s e m + 1 c u r v e s c a n b e r e d u c t io n p o in t s ,
s o e a c h o f t h e c u r v e s m u s t b e ir r e d u c ib le . N o w it is c le a r t h a t p e r fo r m in g t h e
in v e r t e d s u m s t h a t u n d o t h e r e d u c t io n c u t s w e m a d e b e fo r e w ill p r o d u c e t h e
o r ig in a l c u r v e .
C o n s id e r a n a r b it r a r y s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s . B y P r o p o s i-
t io n 1 .1 a n d N o t e 2 , t h e r e s u lt in g c u r v e m u s t h a v e a r e d u c t io n p o in t , h e n c e it
is r e d u c ib le .
A n y p a r t ia lly r e d u c ib le c u r v e c a n b e e x p r e s s e d a s a s e q u e n c e P r o p o s i t i o n 1 . 5 .
o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s w h e r e a t le a s t o n e o f t h e fa c t o r c u r v e s is n o t c o m -
p le t e ly r e d u c ib le . C o n v e r s e ly , e v e r y s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s w h e r e
a t le a s t o n e o f t h e fa c t o r c u r v e s is n o t c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le y ie ld s a p a r t ia lly
r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
P r o o f. C o n s id e r a n a r b it r a r y p a r t ia lly r e d u c ib le c u r v e . S in c e it h a s a r e d u c t io n
p o in t it c a n b e r e d u c e d in t o t w o c u r v e s , s o it is c le a r t h a t it is t h e r e s u lt o f s o m e
in v e r t e d s u m o f c u r v e s . T h e q u e s t io n is w h e t h e r it is n e c e s s a r y t h a t o n e o f t h e
fa c t o r c u r v e s n o t b e c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le . C o r o lla r y 1 .3 s h o w s t h a t it is .
F o r t h e c o n v e r s e , c o n s id e r a n a r b it r a r y s e q u e n c e o f in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s
w h e r e a t le a s t o n e o f t h e fa c t o r c u r v e s is n o t c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le . B y P r o p o s i-
t io n 1 .4 , t h is s e q u e n c e o f s u m s c a n n o t y ie ld a n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e . N o t e 2 s h o w s
a d d it io n a lly t h a t t h e r e s u lt in g c u r v e c a n n o t b e c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le . T h e r e -
s u lt in g c u r v e is t h e r e fo r e p a r t ia lly r e d u c ib le .
2 I r r e d u c i b l e C u r v e s a s B u i l d i n g B l o c k s
W e w o u ld lik e t o b e a b le t o w r it e e v e r y r e d u c ib le c u r v e a s a s e t o f n ir r e d u c ib le
(cid:0) c u r v e s t o g e t h e r w it h n 1 p a ir s o f s t r a n d s fr o m t h o s e c u r v e s t h a t in d ic a t e
3 9
F ig u r e 4 : T h e d e c o m p o s it io n o f a r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
w h ic h in v e r t e d s u m s w o u ld n e e d t o b e t a k e n t o r e c o n s t r u c t t h e r e d u c ib le c u r v e
in q u e s t io n . F ig u r e 4 s h o w s a c o m p lic a t e d r e d u c ib le c u r v e r e d u c e d d o w n t o
it s c o n s t it u e n t ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a n d r e c ip e o f c o n n e c t e d s u m s . B u t is t h is
d e c o m p o s it io n u n iq u e ? T h a t is , is t h e r e a n y o t h e r s e t o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s o r
r e c ip e o f in v e r t e d s u m s t h a t w o u ld y ie ld t h e s a m e r e d u c ib le c u r v e ? T h e fo llo w in g
t h e o r e m s h o w s t h e r e is n o t .
U p o n d e c o m p o s it io n , e v e r y r e d u c ib le c u r v e g iv e s r is e t o a u n iq u e T h e o r e m 2 . 1 .
s e t o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s t o g e t h e r w it h a u n iq u e s e t o f in v e r t e d s u m s a m o n g t h o s e
c u r v e s t h a t y ie ld s t h e c u r v e in q u e s t io n .
P r o o f. C o n s id e r a n a r b it r a r y r e d u c ib le c u r v e w it h m r e d u c t io n p o in t s . R e c a ll
fr o m N o t e 2 t h a t p e r fo r m in g t h e r e d u c t io n c u t a t t h e s e r e d u c t io n p o in t s d o e s n ’t
c h a n g e t h e s t a t u s o f a n y o f t h e o t h e r d o u b le p o in t s w it h r e s p e c t t o r e d u c ib il-
it y . T h u s a ft e r p e r fo r m in g t h e m p o s s ib le r e d u c t io n c u t s , w e w ill h a v e m + 1
ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s , a s w e ll a s a s e t o f m r e d u c t io n c u t s t o r e p a ir w it h m s p e c i(cid:12) c
in v e r t e d s u m s . S in c e t h e s e r e d u c t io n c u t s c a n o n ly b e m a d e in o n e w a y , t h e ir -
r e d u c ib le fa c t o r c u r v e s a r e u n iq u e ly d e t e r m in e d ; t h e in v e r t e d s u m s a r e u n iq u e ly
d e t e r m in e d a s t h e r e v e r s e p r o c e d u r e s o f t h e r e d u c t io n c u t s . T h is p r o v e s t h e
t h e o r e m .
A s s u m in g t h e a b o v e t h e o r e m s , if o n e w e r e t o k n o w a ll t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s
w it h n < k c r o s s in g s , t h e n t h e p r o b le m o f c o n s t r u c t in g a ll o f t h e c u r v e s w it h
4 0
F
c
n
t
k
A
p
t
D
N
D
I
s
P
w
P
s
a
n
s
o
a
t
c
o
a
T
1
ig u r e 5 : A ll t h e d is t in c t in v e r t e d s u m s o f t w o c o p ie s o f S y ie ld s a ll t h e d is t in c t
u r v e s w it h o n e d o u b le p o in t .
(cid:20) k c r o s s in g s c o m e s d o w n t o m o r e b a s ic c o m b in a t o r ic s . O n e w o u ld t r y t o (cid:12) n d
h e d is t in c t c o m b in a t io n s o f in v e r t e d s u m s in v o lv in g ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s w it h n <
(cid:20) c r o s s in g s ; t h is s h o u ld p r o d u c e a ll t h e r e d u c ib le c u r v e s w it h n k c r o s s in g s .
s a s im p le e x a m p le , w e c a n d e r iv e a ll t h e 1 - c r o s s in g c u r v e s b y t a k in g a ll t h e
1
o s s ib le in v e r t e d s u m s o f t w o c o p ie s o f S . S in c e e a c h c ir c le h a s o n ly o n e s t r a n d ,
h e r e a r e o n ly t w o d is t in c t w a y s o f t a k in g t h e ir in v e r t e d s u m ( s e e F ig u r e 5 ) .
- r e d u c ib le e (cid:12) n i t i o n 2 . 1 . A r e d u c ib le c u r v e is n if it h a s n r e d u c t io n p o in t s .
o t e t h a t s u c h a c u r v e h a s e x a c t ly n + 1 ir r e d u c ib le fa c t o r c u r v e s .
in v e r t e d s u m s e t ( I S S ) e (cid:12) n i t i o n 2 . 2 . T h e o f t w o ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s ( d e n o t e d
1 2 S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) ) ) is t h e s e t o f a ll d is t in c t c u r v e s t h a t c a n r e s u lt fr o m a n y in v e r t e d
1 1
1 2 u m b e t w e e n (cid:13) a n d (cid:13) . F o r e x a m p le , F ig u r e 5 s h o w s I S S ( S ; S ) .
1 2 W e c a n p u t a n u p p e r b o u n d o n t h e c a r d in a lit y o f , r o p o s i t i o n 2 . 2 . I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) )
1 2 h e r e is a n - c r o s s in g c u r v e a n d is a n - c r o s s in g c u r v e , b y (cid:13) m (cid:13) n
(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 1 2 C a r d ( I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) ) ) S t r S t r ( m + n + 3 ) (cid:13) (cid:13)
1
1 2 a n d , p r o v id e d t h a t n e it h e r n o r is , (cid:13) (cid:13) S
(cid:20) 1 2 C a r d ( I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) ) ) 4 m n ( m + n + 3 )
r o o f. T h e fo r m u la d e r iv e s e a s ily b y c o n s id e r in g t h e p o s s ib le c a s e s : (cid:12) r s t c o n -
id e r t h e c a s e w h e r e t h e t w o c u r v e s a r e u n n e s t e d ( i.e ., o n e in t h e le ft h a lf- p la n e
n d t h e o t h e r in t h e r ig h t h a lf- p la n e ) . T h e w o r s t c a s e s c e n a r io w o u ld b e fo r
e it h e r c u r v e t o h a v e a n y k in d o f s y m m e t r y , fo r c in g e v e r y s t r a n d t o b e c o n -
1 id e r e d in d iv id u a lly . T h e n e v e r y u n iq u e p a ir o f s t r a n d s , o n e fr o m (cid:13) a n d t h e
2 t h e r fr o m (cid:13) , c o u ld h a v e a n a s s o c ia t e d in v e r t e d s u m b e t w e e n t h e t w o c u r v e s
n d e v e r y o n e o f t h o s e in v e r t e d s u m s c o u ld r e s u lt in a d is t in c t c u r v e . S o fa r
1 2 h is g iv e s S t r S t r a s a n u p p e r b o u n d . N o w c o n s id e r t h e c a s e s w h e r e o n e (cid:13) (cid:13)
u r v e is n e s t e d in s id e o n e o f t h e b o u n d e d r e g io n s o f t h e p la n e d e lin e a t e d b y t h e
1 2 t h e r . T h e w o r s t c a s e a g a in g iv e s S t r S t r a s t h e u p p e r b o u n d . T h e r e a r e a n (cid:13) (cid:13)
1 2 2 1 d d it io n a l n + 1 c a s e s fo r (cid:13) n e s t e d in (cid:13) , a n d m + 1 c a s e s fo r (cid:13) n e s t e d in (cid:13) .
h e t o t a l c a s e s a r e ( n + 1 ) + ( m + 1 ) + 1 = m + n + 3 , w h ic h is e x h a u s t iv e .
4 1
R
s
e
g
5
n
s
o
c
1
a
w
o
\
o
o
c
t
t
g
c
(
g
N
p
A
U
A
P
P
o
a
t
w
e m a r k 2 .1 . T h is u p p e r b o u n d is v e r y g e n e r o u s a n d t h e r e a r e p r o b a b ly v e r y
im p le c o n s id e r a t io n s t h a t c o u ld b e t a k e n in t o a c c o u n t t o m a k e it t ig h t e r . F o r
1
x a m p le , C a r d ( I S S ( S ; 3 :1 ) ) , w h e r e 3 :1 is t h e t h r e e - c r o s s in g t r e fo il c u r v e , is
iv e n a n u p p e r b o u n d o f 3 6 b y t h e fo r m u la , w h e n t h e a c t u a l n u m b e r is o n ly
. I t is n ic e , h o w e v e r , t o b e a b le t o c o n (cid:12) d e n t ly g iv e a n u p p e r b o u n d o n t h e
u m b e r o f 1 - r e d u c ib le 6 - c r o s s in g c u r v e s . T h e o n ly in v e r t e d s u m s e t s t h a t y ie ld
u c h c u r v e s a r e s e t s w h e r e o n e c u r v e h a s o n e c r o s s in g a n d t h e o t h e r h a s (cid:12) v e ,
r w h e r e b o t h c u r v e s h a v e t h r e e c r o s s in g s ( t h e r e a r e n o 2 - c r o s s in g ir r e d u c ib le
u r v e s t o p a ir w it h a n y o f t h e 4 - c r o s s in g ir r e d u c ib le s ) . T h e a b o v e fo r m u la g iv e s
4 5 2 a s t h e m a x im u m p o s s ib le n u m b e r o f s u c h c u r v e s . S im ila r m e t h o d s c o u ld b e
p p lie d t o (cid:12) n d u p p e r b o u n d s fo r 2 - r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a n d b e y o n d , w h ic h , t o g e t h e r
it h a n u p p e r b o u n d o n t h e n u m b e r o f ir r e d u c ib le s , w o u ld y ie ld u p p e r b o u n d s
n t h e t o t a l n u m b e r o f c u r v e s w it h a g iv e n n u m b e r o f c r o s s in g s .
N o t e h o w , in F ig u r e 5 , t h e s y m m e t r y o f t h e t w o c u r v e s ( in t h is c a s e , t h e
s y m m e t r y " is t h e fa c t t h a t t h e t w o fa c t o r c u r v e s a r e id e n t ic a l) h a s m a d e o n e
f t h e p o s s ib le t h r e e c a s e s e q u iv a le n t | t h e in v e r t e d s u m w it h c ir c le A in s id e
f c ir c le B a n d t h e in v e r t e d s u m w it h c ir c le B in s id e o f c ir c le A a r e e q u iv a le n t
a s e s . I n g e n e r a l, a n y s y m m e t r y w it h in e it h e r o f t h e c u r v e s in v o lv e d o r b e t w e e n
h e t w o c u r v e s s e e m s t o r e d u c e t h e n u m b e r o f d is t in c t in v e r t e d s u m s . T h e fa c t
h a t m a n y c u r v e s h a v e s e v e r a l s y m m e t r ie s is a n o t h e r r e a s o n t h e u p p e r b o u n d
iv e n a b o v e is s o g e n e r o u s .
W h e n w e c a n id e n t ify h o w m a n y s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t r e g io n s ir r e d u c ib le
u r v e s h a v e a n d h o w m a n y s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t s t r a n d s b o r d e r e a c h r e g io n
t h is s e e m s v e r y e a s y , a t le a s t fo r c u r v e s w it h lo w n u m b e r s o f c r o s s in g s ) , w e c a n
iv e a n e x a c t n u m b e r fo r t h e c a r d in a lit y o f a n y I S S in v o lv in g t h e s e c u r v e s .
o t a t io n . F o r a n y ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e (cid:13) , le t U b e t h e u n b o u n d e d r e g io n o f t h e
la n e d e lin e a t e d b y (cid:13) a n d la b e l t h e r e s t o f t h e s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t r e g io n s
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) ; B ; C ; . L e t u b e t h e n u m b e r o f s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t s t r a n d s b o r d e r in g
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) , a n d a ; b ; c b e t h e n u m b e r o f s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t s t r a n d s b o r d e r in g
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) ; B ; C ; , r e s p e c t iv e ly .
1 2 T h e c a r d in a lit y o f is g iv e n b y r o p o s i t i o n 2 . 3 . I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) )
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 C a r d ( I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) ) ) = u u + u ( a + b + + j ) + u ( a + b + + k )
1 2 if a n d a r e d i(cid:11) e r e n t c u r v e s , a n d (cid:13) (cid:13)
2
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 C a r d ( I S S ( (cid:13) ; (cid:13) ) ) = ( u + u ) = 2 + u ( a + b + + j )
if t h e t w o c u r v e s a r e id e n t ic a l.
r o o f. T h is p r o o f fo llo w s t h e p r o o f o f P r o p o s it io n 2 .2 , r e d u c in g t h e n u m b e r
f r e g io n s a n d s t r a n d s t o t h e s y m m e t r ic a lly d is t in c t o n e s . T h e a r g u m e n t s a r e
1 2 n a lo g o u s e x c e p t w h e r e n o t e d . T h e u u t e r m d e r iv e s fr o m t h e c a s e w h e r e t h e
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 2 2 w o c u r v e s a r e u n n e s t e d . T h e u ( a + b + + j ) t e r m a c c o u n t s fo r t h e c a s e s
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 2 1 1 1 h e r e (cid:13) is n e s t e d in (cid:13) , a n d t h e u ( a + b + + k ) t e r m a c c o u n t s fo r t h e
4 2
c
w
(cid:13)
r
w
t
a
c
b
t
2 1 1 2 a s e s w h e r e (cid:13) is n e s t e d in (cid:13) . W h e n (cid:13) a n d (cid:13) a r e id e n t ic a l c u r v e s , t h e c a s e s
1 2 2 h e r e (cid:13) is n e s t e d in (cid:13) a r e n o t d is t in c t fr o m t h e c a s e s w h e r e (cid:13) is n e s t e d in
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 2 1 1 1 , s o w e d r o p t h e u ( a + b + + k ) t e r m . W h e n t h e y a r e u n n e s t e d t h e
e d u n d a n t c o m b in a t io n s o f d is t in c t s t r a n d s e n d u p e lim in a t in g h a lf o f t h e c a s e s
2
1 1 h e r e t w o d i(cid:11) e r e n t s t r a n d s a r e in v o lv e d , g iv in g t h e ( u + u ) = 2 t e r m .
1 1
F o r e x a m p le , t o v e r ify t h a t C a r d ( I S S ( S ; S ) ) = 2 , la b e l t h e r e g io n in s id e
1 2 1 2 1 h e (cid:12) r s t c ir c le A , t h e r e g io n in s id e t h e s e c o n d c ir c le A . T h e n u = u = a =
2 = 1 , s o w e h a v e
1 1
C a r d ( I S S ( S ; S ) ) = 1 + 1 = 2
(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) I t is h e lp fu l t o h a v e a lis t in g o f t h e v a lu e s o f u ; a ; b ; c ; fo r t h e ir r e d u c ib le
u r v e s . T h e s e a r e t h e v a lu e s fo r t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s u p t o (cid:12) v e c r o s s in g s .
c u r v e u a b c d e
0 .1 1 1 - - - -
3 .1 1 2 1 - - -
3 .2 1 2 1 - - -
4 .1 2 3 2 2 1 -
4 .2 1 2 2 1 - -
5 .1 1 2 1 - - -
5 .2 1 3 1 1 - -
5 .3 1 2 2 1 - -
5 .4 2 4 2 2 1 1
5 .5 1 4 2 2 2 1
5 .6 2 3 2 2 1 -
W it h t h is t a b le w e c a n e a s ily c o m p u t e , fo r e x a m p le ,
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :5 ; 5 :6 ) ) = 2 + 1 ( 3 + 2 + 2 + 1 ) + 2 ( 4 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 1 ) = 3 2
A s n o t e d a b o v e , t h e u p p e r b o u n d fo r m u la fo r t h e I S S g iv e s 1 4 5 2 a s a n u p p e r
o u n d o n t h e n u m b e r o f 1 - r e d u c ib le 6 - c r o s s in g c u r v e s . N o w w e c a n c o m p u t e
h e e x a c t n u m b e r :
C a r d ( I S S ( 3 :1 ; 3 :1 ) ) = 4
C a r d ( I S S ( 3 :1 ; 3 :2 ) ) = 7
C a r d ( I S S ( 3 :2 ; 3 :2 ) ) = 4
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :1 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 5
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :2 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 7
4 3
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :3 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 7
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :4 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 1 4
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :5 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 1 3
C a r d ( I S S ( 5 :6 ; 0 :1 ) ) = 1 2
( T o t a l = 7 3 )
F o r t h e d e t e r m in a t io n o f t h e s e t o f d is t in c t in v e r t e d s u m s o f c u r v e s w it h
lo w n u m b e r s o f c r o s s in g s u s in g fe w in v e r t e d s u m s , t h e c o m b in a t o r ic s in v o lv e d in
c o n s t r u c t in g t h e r e d u c ib le c u r v e s is s im p le , b u t fo r h ig h e r n u m b e r s o f c r o s s in g s
o r m o r e in v e r t e d s u m s t h e c o m b in a t o r ic s p r o b le m is d i(cid:14) c u lt , a s it is a t le a s t
a s h a r d a s t h e p r o b le m o f (cid:12) n d in g t h e d is t in c t t r e e s w it h n v e r t ic e s . I n [2 ],
F . A ic a r d i d is c u s s e s c o m b in a t o r ia l s t r u c t u r e s fo r c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e s in
t e r m s o f t r e e s ; it a p p e a r s t h a t t h e c o m b in a t o r ic s fo r t h e c o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le
c u r v e s c a n b e e a s ily a d a p t e d fo r p a r t ia lly r e d u c ib le c u r v e s . S u c h a m o d i(cid:12) c a t io n
o f A ic a r d i’s t h e o r y s e e m s a p r o m is in g d ir e c t io n fo r fu t u r e r e s e a r c h .
3 F i n d i n g t h e I r r e d u c i b l e s
S o w e s e e t h a t in s o m e s e n s e t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a r e t h e b u ild in g b lo c k s fo r
t h e s p a c e o f p la n e c u r v e s , fo r if w e k n o w t h e m w e c a n c o n s t r u c t t h e o t h e r c u r v e s
b y c o m b in a t o r ia l m e t h o d s b a s e d o n t h e n e s t in g o f t h e fa c t o r ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s
a n d t h e c h o ic e o f w h ic h o f t h e ir s t r a n d s t o jo in w it h t h e in v e r t e d s u m . F r o m h e r e
t h e m o s t im p e r a t iv e p r o b le m s e e m s t o b e t o (cid:12) n d , c h a r a c t e r iz e , a n d c la s s ify t h e
ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s . T h e m o s t p r o m is in g a p p r o a c h s o fa r h a s b e e n t o a s s o c ia t e
a c e r t a in t y p e o f p la n a r g r a p h w it h ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a n d t h e n t o (cid:12) n d a ll t h e
d is t in c t g r a p h s o f t h a t t y p e .
c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 3 . 1 . A is a g r a p h in w h ic h n o n e o f t h e e d g e s
in t e r s e c t a n d w h e r e r e m o v in g a n y e d g e w o u ld d e c r e a s e t h e n u m b e r o f r e g io n s
fo r m e d b y t h e g r a p h b y o n e .
I t w ill b e c o m e c le a r la t e r t h a t e v e r y ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e h a s a c o r r e s p o n d in g
c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h t h a t is u n iq u e t o t h a t c u r v e . T h e n a t u r e o f t h a t c o r r e -
s p o n d e n c e is w e ll k n o w n ; t h e fo llo w in g e x p la n a t io n a n d c la im s a r e b a s e d o n
in fo r m a t io n fr o m p p . 5 1 - 5 5 o f [1 ]. ( T h e v a lid it y o f t h e fo llo w in g m e t h o d s e e m s
in t u it iv e ly c o r r e c t a n d h a s s o fa r b e e n v e r y s u c c e s s fu l in d e r iv in g ir r e d u c ib le
c u r v e s , b u t p r o v in g t h e le g it im a c y o f t h e m e t h o d r ig o r o u s ly w o u ld h a v e t a k e n
m o r e t im e t h a n w a s a v a ila b le | p e r h a p s fu t u r e w o r k c o u ld b e d o n e t o (cid:12) ll in
t h e d e t a ils , a s s u m in g s im ila r w o r k h a s n o t a lr e a d y b e e n c a r r ie d o u t .)
E v e r y n - c r o s s in g c u r v e d iv id e s t h e p la n e in t o n + 2 r e g io n s t h a t a r e 2 -
c o lo r a b le . T h a t is , t h e r e g io n s c a n b e c o lo r e d s o t h a t n o lik e c o lo r e d r e g io n s a r e
a d ja c e n t ( s e e F ig u r e 6 ) . ( T o r e a d e r s o f [3 ] a n e w p r o o f o f t h is fa c t is e v id e n t
+
u s in g A r n o ld ’s p e r e s t r o ik a s o n t h e K c u r v e s , b y s h o w in g t h a t t h e m o v e s J , i
(cid:0)
J , a n d S t d o n o t c h a n g e t h e c o lo r a b ilit y .) W e c a ll a r e g io n b o u n d e d b y a c u r v e
4 4
F ig u r e 6 : A 2 - c o lo r a t io n o f a n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e .
F ig u r e 7 : T h e c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h a s s o c ia t e d w it h a n 6 - c r o s s in g ir r e d u c ib le
c u r v e .
e x t e r io r a n r e g io n if it m u s t r e c e iv e t h e s a m e c o lo r a s t h e u n b o u n d e d r e g io n in
in t e r io r a 2 - c o lo r a t io n ; w e c a ll a r e g io n if it is n o t e x t e r io r .
A c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h a s s o c ia t e d w it h a n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e is c o n s t r u c t e d
a s fo llo w s . P la c e a v e r t e x in s id e e a c h in t e r io r r e g io n a n d t h e n p la c e e d g e s t h a t
c o n n e c t t h e v e r t ic e s t h r o u g h t h e c r o s s in g s w it h o u t le t t in g t h e e d g e s c r o s s , a s
in F ig u r e 7 . N o t ic e t h a t e v e r y c r o s s in g is t r a v e r s e d b y e x a c t ly o n e e d g e , a n d
t h a t e v e r y r e g io n o f t h e g r a p h e n c lo s e s e x a c t ly o n e e x t e r io r r e g io n o f t h e c u r v e
( w it h t h e e x c e p t io n o f t h e u n b o u n d e d r e g io n ) . I t is n o t d i(cid:14) c u lt t o s e e t h a t a n
ir r e d u c ib le a c u r v e c a n a lw a y s b e c o n s t r u c t e d u n iq u e ly fr o m it s g r a p h , a n d t h a t
e v e r y ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e h a s a u n iq u e a s s o c ia t e d c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h .
T h is r e p r e s e n t a t io n o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a s c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h s r e d u c e s t h e
p r o b le m o f (cid:12) n d in g a ll t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s t o a n a p p a r e n t ly s im p le r c o m b i-
n a t o r ic s p r o b le m : (cid:12) n d a ll t h e d is t in c t c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h s w it h c e r t a in r e -
4 5
s t r ic t io n s . T h e s e r e s t r ic t io n s fa ll o u t e a s ily fr o m b a s ic p r o p e r t ie s o f ir r e d u c ib le
c u r v e s . I n t h e fo llo w in g , V s h a ll d e n o t e t h e n u m b e r o f v e r t ic e s o f a g r a p h , E
t h e n u m b e r o f e d g e s , R t h e n u m b e r o f ( b o u n d e d ) r e g io n s e n c lo s e d b y t h e g r a p h ,
n t h e n u m b e r o f c r o s s in g s o n t h e c u r v e , r t h e n u m b e r o f e x t e r io r r e g io n s o f t h e e
c u r v e ( e x c lu d in g t h e u n b o u n d e d r e g io n ) , a n d r t h e n u m b e r o f in t e r io r r e g io n s i
o f t h e c u r v e .
F r o m t h e E u le r e q u a t io n w e h a v e
(cid:0) V + R 1 = E = n
a n d it is c le a r fr o m t h e c o n s t r u c t io n ( o f a c u r v e fr o m it s g r a p h ) t h a t
(cid:21) V = r 1 i
a n d
R = r e
fo r e v e r y ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e . A ls o n o t e t h a t e v e r y c u r v e t h a t is n o t c o m p le t e ly
r e d u c ib le m u s t c le a r ly h a v e a t le a s t o n e e x t e r io r r e g io n .
R e m a r k 3 .1 . I t w o u ld b e h e lp fu l t o k n o w , b e fo r e a t t e m p t in g t o (cid:12) n d a ll t h e
c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h s , w h e t h e r e v e r y g r a p h w it h t h e s e r e s t r ic t io n s c o r r e s p o n d s
t o a n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e . U n fo r t u n a t e ly , t h e r e a r e m o r e o f s u c h g r a p h s t h a n t h e r e
a r e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s , s in c e m a n y o f t h e g r a p h s c o r r e s p o n d t o im m e r s io n s o f
m o r e t h a n o n e c ir c le ( c a ll t h e s e im m e r s io n s o f m c ir c le s , m > 1 , m - c u r v e s ) . S o
fa r a w a y o f d e t e r m in in g w h e t h e r a g iv e n c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h w ill c o r r e s p o n d
t o a n m - c u r v e h a s n o t b e e n fo u n d , o t h e r t h a n a c t u a lly c o n s t r u c t in g t h e c u r v e .
T h is ju s t m e a n s w e w ill h a v e t o t e s t m o r e c a s e s , b u t p r o v id e d w e c a n (cid:12) n d
a ll t h e d is t in c t p la n a r g r a p h s w it h n e d g e s w it h t h e n e c e s s a r y r e s t r ic t io n s , w e
c a n s im p ly c o n s t r u c t a ll t h e c o r r e s p o n d in g c u r v e s t o (cid:12) n d a ll t h e ir r e d u c ib le n -
c r o s s in g c u r v e s ( a n d a s a b o n u s w e w ill h a v e fo u n d a ll t h e ir r e d u c ib le n - c r o s s in g
m - c u r v e s ) .
(cid:20) I n [3 ], A r n o ld g iv e s a c o m p le t e lis t in g o f a ll t h e c u r v e s w it h n 5 c r o s s in g s .
A s o u n d g o a l fo r t h is p r o je c t w o u ld b e t o (cid:12) n d a m e t h o d o f d e r iv in g a ll t h e
(cid:20) c u r v e s w it h n 7 c r o s s in g s ( w h ic h I e s t im a t e n u m b e r in t h e t e n s o f t h o u s a n d s ) .
A s s h o w n a b o v e , if w e c o u ld (cid:12) n d a ll t h e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s w it h n = 6 c r o s s in g s ,
t h e r e s t w o u ld b e a s im p le r c o m b in a t o r ic a l is s u e t h a t c o u ld p o s s ib ly e v e n b e
h a n d le d b y a c o m p u t e r . T o t h a t e n d , w e n o w a t t e m p t t o d e r iv e t h e 6 - c r o s s in g
ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s .
A n ir r e d u c ib le 6 - c r o s s in g c u r v e m a y h a v e fr o m t w o t o s ix in t e r io r r e g io n s , s o
w e p r o c e e d b y c a s e s o f t h e n u m b e r s o f in t e r io r r e g io n s o f t h e c u r v e . T o o b t a in
a ll t h e 6 - c r o s s in g ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s w it h t w o in t e r io r r e g io n s , w e lo o k a t c lo s e d
p la n a r g r a p h s w it h t w o v e r t ic e s a n d s ix e d g e s , w h ic h fr o m t h e E u le r e q u a t io n
w e k n o w w ill c r e a t e (cid:12) v e b o u n d e d r e g io n s . F o r t h e c u r v e s w it h t h r e e in t e r io r
r e g io n s , w e lo o k a t g r a p h s w it h t h r e e v e r t ic e s a n d s ix e d g e s , a n d s o o n ( s e e
F ig u r e 9 , F ig u r e 1 0 , a n d F ig u r e 1 1 | t h e g r a p h s c o r r e s p o n d in g t o im m e r s io n s
o f m o r e t h a n o n e c ir c le h a v e b e e n o m it t e d ) . T h is lis t is p r o b a b ly n o t e x h a u s t iv e ,
4 6
s in c e a c o m b in a t o r ia l m e t h o d o f (cid:12) n d in g a ll t h e d is t in c t g r a p h s h a s n o t y e t b e e n
fo u n d . U s in g c u r r e n t ly k n o w n o r u n k n o w n c o m b in a t o r ic a l t h e o r y t o u n d e r s t a n d
t h e c o m b in a t o r ic s o f t h e s e c lo s e d p la n a r g r a p h s is a n o t h e r p o s s ib le d ir e c t io n fo r
fu t u r e w o r k .
4 I r r e d u c i b l e C u r v e s a n d A l t e r n a t i n g K n o t s
1
p r e im a g e s D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 4 . 1 . T h e o n S o f a d o u b le p o in t a o n a c u r v e (cid:13) a r e t h e
1 1 2 R ! t w o p o in t s o n S t h a t g e t s e n t b y t h e m a p (cid:13) : S t o t h e s a m e p o in t a .
1
G a u s s d ia g r a m D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 4 . 2 . T h e o f a n n - c r o s s in g c u r v e is a n im a g e o f S
w it h a c o lle c t io n o f n c h o r d s , w h e r e e a c h c h o r d c o n n e c t s t h e t w o p r e im a g e s o f
a d o u b le p o in t o f t h e c u r v e ( s e e F ig u r e 8 ) .
1
b is e c t io n d ia g r a m D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 4 . 3 . A o f a c u r v e is a n im a g e o f S t o g e t h e r w it h
a c o lle c t io n o f t h e c h o r d s t h a t a r e t h e p e r p e n d ic u la r b is e c t o r s o f t h e c h o r d s
in t h e c u r v e ’s G a u s s d ia g r a m ( w e m u s t a d d t h a t t h e p r e im a g e s o n t h e G a u s s
d ia g r a m m u s t b e e v e n ly s p a c e d ) , w it h m u lt ip lic it y n o t e d .
N o t e t h a t a b is e c t io n d ia g r a m is ju s t a G a u s s d ia g r a m w it h e v e n ly s p a c e d
p r e im a g e s w h e r e e a c h c h o r d h a s b e e n m o v e d n o r m a l t o it s d ir e c t io n s o t h a t it
1
c r o s s e s t h e c e n t e r o f S , n o t in g m u lt ip lic it ie s ( s e e F ig u r e 8 ) .
A c u r v e is ir r e d u c ib le i(cid:11) e v e r y c h o r d in it s G a u s s d ia g r a m P r o p o s i t i o n 4 . 1 .
p a r t ic ip a t e s in a n in t e r s e c t i o n w it h a n o t h e r c h o r d ( it s G a u s s d ia g r a m is t h e n
) . t o t a lly n o n - p la n a r
( T h is h o ld s fo r a ll c u r v e s lis t e d in [3 ].)
P r o o f o f t h e p r o p o s it io n . R e c a ll t h a t a r e d u c t io n p o in t o n a c u r v e is a d o u b le
p o in t t h a t d iv id e s t h e c u r v e in t o t w o p ie c e s w it h n o o t h e r c o m m o n p o in t s . I f a
G a u s s d ia g r a m h a s a n o n - in t e r s e c t in g c h o r d , it m e a n s ( fr o m t h e c o n s t r u c t io n )
t h a t t h e p a r t o f t h e c ir c le o n o n e s id e o f t h e c h o r d h a s n o p o in t s in c o m m o n
w it h t h e p a r t o f t h e c ir c le o n t h e o t h e r s id e o f t h e c h o r d a ft e r b e in g m a p p e d b y
t h e fu n c t io n (cid:13) t h a t d e (cid:12) n e s t h e c u r v e w h o s e G a u s s d ia g r a m w e a r e e x a m in in g .
W e k n o w , t h e n , t h a t a n y n o n - in t e r s e c t in g c h o r d o n a G a u s s d ia g r a m m u s t c o r -
r e s p o n d t o a r e d u c t io n p o in t o n t h e c u r v e . T h is p r o v e s t h a t e v e r y ir r e d u c ib le
c u r v e m u s t h a v e a t o t a lly n o n - p la n a r G a u s s d ia g r a m . A s fo r t h e c o n v e r s e , a s -
s u m e w e a r e g iv e n a c u r v e w it h a t o t a lly n o n - p la n a r G a u s s d ia g r a m . I f t h is c u r v e
h a s a r e d u c t io n p o in t , it s G a u s s d ia g r a m m u s t h a v e a c o r r e s p o n d in g c h o r d . B u t
e v e r y c h o r d o n t h e G a u s s d ia g r a m is in t e r s e c t e d b y a n o t h e r c h o r d , s o t h e G a u s s
d ia g r a m is s u c h t h a t s o m e p o in t o n t h e p a r t o f t h e c ir c le o n o n e s id e o f a n y
c h o r d in t h e d ia g r a m m u s t g e t m a p p e d t o t h e s a m e p o in t a s s o m e p o in t o n t h e
p a r t o f t h e c ir c le t h a t is o n t h e o t h e r s id e o f t h e c h o r d . H e n c e n o p o in t s o n t h e
c u r v e a r e r e d u c t io n p o in t s , s o t h e c u r v e is ir r e d u c ib le .
c o m p o s it e D e (cid:12) n i t i o n 4 . 4 . A n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e is c a lle d if a n e w c h o r d c a n b e
d r a w n o n t h e c u r v e ’s G a u s s d ia g r a m t h a t 1 ) d iv id e s t h e d ia g r a m ’s c ir c le in t o
4 7
2 2
3
F
p
ig
a r
u
t
r e 8
ia lly
:
r
T
e
h
d
e
u c
G
ib
a u
le
s
c
s
u
a
r
n
v
d
e ,
b
a
is e
n d
c t io
a n
n
ir
d
r e
ia
d
g
u
4
r
c
8
a
ib
m
le
s o
c u
f
r
a
v e
c
.
o m p le t e ly r e d u c ib le c u r v e , a
V = 2: NONE
4
V = 3:
2
4
2
4
2
F
p
ig
la
u
n
r
a
e
r
9
g
:
r a
6
p
-
h
c r o
s ,
s s
lis
in
t e
g
d
ir
w
r e
it
d
h
u
t
c
h
ib
e
le
ir
c
G
u
a
r
u
v
s
e
s
s
a
4
w
n
9
it
d
h
b
V
is e c
v
t
e r t
io n
ic
d
e s
ia
a s
g r a
d
m
e r iv
s .
e d fr o m c lo s e d
V = 4:
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
F
p
ig
la
u
n
r
a
e
r
1
g
0
r
:
a p
6
h
- c r
s ,
o s
lis
s
t
in
e d
g ir r
w it
e
h
d u c ib le
t h e ir G
c u r v e s
a u s s a
5
w
n
0
d
it h
b
V
is e c
v e
t io
r t
n
ic
d
e s
ia g
a
r
s
a
d
m
e
s
r
.
iv e d fr o m c lo s e d
V = 5: 2
2
4
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
V = 6: NONE
F
p
ig
la
u
n
r
a
e
r
1
g
1
r
:
a p
6
h
- c r
s ,
o s
lis
s
t
in
e d
g ir r
w it
e
h
d u c ib le
t h e ir G
c u r v e s
a u s s a
5
w
n
1
d
it h
b
V
is e c
v e
t io
r t
n
ic
d
e s
ia g
a
r
s
a
d
m
e
s
r
.
iv e d fr o m c lo s e d
t w o r e g io n s , b o t h o f w h ic h c o n t a in c h o r d s a n d 2 ) d o e s n o t in t e r s e c t a n y o f t h e
p r im e d ia g r a m ’s c h o r d s . A n ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e is c a lle d if it is n o t c o m p o s it e .
( T h is d e (cid:12) n it io n is m o t iv a t e d b y t h e p r o je c t io n s o f p r im e a n d c o m p o s it e
k n o t s a n d t h e G a u s s d ia g r a m s s o fa r o b s e r v e d a s b e in g a s s o c ia t e d w it h t h o s e
p r o je c t io n s .)
I t is o b v io u s t h a t e v e r y ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e c a n b e m a d e in t o a n a lt e r n a t in g
k n o t , s im p ly b y c h o o s in g e a c h c r o s s in g t o b e a n u n d e r - o r o v e r - s t r a n d a lt e r n a t e ly
w h ile t r a v e r s in g t h e c u r v e . I t a p p e a r s t h a t t h e r e is a n a t u r a l b ije c t io n b e t w e e n
t h e s e t o f ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s a n d t h e s e t o f r e d u c e d a lt e r n a t in g p r o je c t io n s o f
a lt e r n a t in g k n o t s . I n t h is s e n s e , it s e e m s t h a t s t u d y in g ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s is lik e
s t u d y in g p r o je c t io n s o f k n o t s . T h e q u e s t io n n a t u r a lly a r is e s , is t h e r e a n y t h in g
w e h a v e le a r n e d a b o u t p la n e c u r v e s t h a t c a n t e ll u s s o m e t h in g a b o u t k n o t s ?
O f p a r t ic u la r in t e r e s t h a s b e e n t h e q u e s t io n o f w h ic h c h a r a c t e r is t ic s ir r e d u c ib le
c u r v e s t h a t a r e d i(cid:11) e r e n t p r o je c t io n s o f t h e s a m e a lt e r n a t in g k n o t m ig h t s h a r e .
T h e t w o c u r v e s lis t e d a s 3 :1 a n d 3 :2 in F ig u r e 3 h a v e t h e s a m e G a u s s d ia g r a m ,
a n d if m a d e in t o a lt e r n a t in g k n o t s t h e y t u r n in t o t w o r e d u c e d a lt e r n a t in g p r o -
1 je c t io n s o f t h e a lt e r n a t in g k n o t k n o w n a s 3 ( r e fe r t o [1 ] fo r m o r e in fo r m a t io n ) .
L ik e w is e , t h e c u r v e s 4 :1 a n d 4 :2 h a v e id e n t ic a l G a u s s d ia g r a m s a n d c o r r e s p o n d
1 t o r e d u c e d a lt e r n a t in g p r o je c t io n s o f t h e k n o t 4 . S im ila r fa c t s h o ld fo r t h e
ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s o f (cid:12) v e c r o s s in g s . ( I n c id e n t a lly , it h a s b e e n o b s e r v e d t h a t
c o m p o s it e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s ( a s t h e y a r e d e (cid:12) n e d a b o v e ) c o r r e s p o n d t o r e d u c e d
a lt e r n a t in g p r o je c t io n s o f c o m p o s it e a lt e r n a t in g k n o t s .) C o u ld G a u s s d ia g r a m s
b e a n in v a r ia n t fo r a lt e r n a t in g k n o t s ? F u r t h e r in v e s t ig a t io n s h o w s t h a t t h e r e
a r e s o m e 7 - c r o s s in g ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s t h a t h a s d i(cid:11) e r e n t G a u s s d ia g r a m s , b u t
c o r r e s p o n d t o a lt e r n a t in g p r o je c t io n s o f t h e s a m e a lt e r n a t in g k n o t . S t ill, fo r t h e
p r im e ir r e d u c ib le c u r v e s , t h e G a u s s d ia g r a m s s e e m t o r e t a in a c e r t a in s im ila r it y
w h e n t h e y c o r r e s p o n d t o p r o je c t io n s o f t h e s a m e k n o t . T h is o b s e r v a t io n le d t o
t h e fo r m u la t io n o f t h e b is e c t io n d ia g r a m .
S o fa r t h e b is e c t io n d ia g r a m s e e m s lik e a p o s s ib le in v a r ia n t fo r k n o t s , a l-
t h o u g h it m a y s im p ly b e a n in v a r ia n t t h a t is a lr e a d y u n d e r s t o o d , b u t in a
d i(cid:11) e r e n t m a n ife s t a t io n . I t a ls o m a y b e t h a t it is a n in v a r ia n t t h a t is n o t p a r -
t ic u la r ly u s e fu l. F u t u r e r e s e a r c h m ig h t r e v e a l w h e t h e r t h is is t r u ly a n in v a r ia n t
fo r k n o t s a n d w h y , a n d w h e t h e r it is o f a n y u s e .
R e f e r e n c e s
T h e K n o t B o o k [1 ] C . A d a m s , , W .H . F r e e m a n a n d C o ., N e w Y o r k , 1 9 9 4 .
A d v a n c e s in S o v ie t M a t h e m a t ic s [2 ] F . A ic a r d i, T r e e - lik e c u r v e s , 2 1 , A m e r .
M a t h . S o c ., P r o v id e n c e , 1 9 9 4 , p p . 1 - 3 1 .
[3 ] V .I . A r n o ld , P la n e c u r v e s , t h e ir in v a r ia n t s , p e r e s t r o ik a s a n d c la s s i(cid:12) c a t io n s ,
A d v a n c e s in S o v ie t M a t h e m a t ic s 2 1 , A m e r . M a t h . S o c ., P r o v id e n c e , 1 9 9 4 ,
p p . 3 3 - 9 .
5 2
[4 ] H
1
.
9 3
W
7 ,
h
p
it
p
n
.
e
2
y ,
7 6
O
- 2
n
8 4
r
.
e g u la r c lo s e d c u
5
r
3
v e s in t h e p la n e , C o m p o s it io M a t h 4 ,

--- END OF Irreducible Plane Curves.pdf ---


--- START OF tex.pdf ---
1. Un paquete completo de primera y segunda variacion para diagramas cs
1.1. Lo que vas a lograr con este documento. La meta es que puedas hacer lo siguiente,
sin adivinar nada:
• Construir la matriz completa L(c) de restricciones lineales de primer orden.
• Calcular el funcional lineal de primera variacion de longitud Φ(δc,ω).
• Decidir criticidad: el diagrama es critico si y solo si Φ se anula en todas las direcciones
admisibles.
• (Opcional) Calcular una segunda variacion (forma cuadratica) sobre direcciones admis-
ibles.
Lo importante: L(c) solo describe movimientos permitidos (primer orden). La longitud entra
por separado en Φ.
1.2. Datos del diagrama cs y convenciones.
Discos. Hay N discos unitarios D ,...,D con centros c ∈ R2 y radio R = 1.
1 N i
Piezas cs. El diagrama cs γ esta compuesto por:
• segmentos rectos (en el complemento de los discos) cuyos extremos son tangencias con
discos,
• arcos circulares sobre fronteras ∂D cuyos extremos son tangencias con el mismo disco.
k
Conjuntos indice (combinatoria fija).
• E = conjunto de contactos disco–disco, cada elemento es un par no ordenado {i,j}.
• T = conjunto de tangencias curva–disco, cada elemento es una etiqueta α.
• S = conjunto de segmentos, cada segmento es un par ordenado α → β de tangencias.
• A = conjunto de arcos, cada arco es un triple (α → β,k,σ ): extremos α,β sobre el
a
mismo disco D y un signo σ ∈ {+1,−1}.
k a
Datos geometricos minimos (esto SI es entrada). Para poder construir matrices y longitud,
necesitas:
• los centros c ,...,c ,
1 N
• para cada tangencia α ∈ T: el disco k(α) ∈ {1,...,N} y el punto p ∈ ∂D ,
α k(α)
• la lista S de segmentos α → β,
• la lista A de arcos (α → β,k,σ ).
a
Convencion de rotacion 90◦. Usamos J(x,y) = (−y,x).
Normal y tangente en una tangencia (calculable desde c y p). Si α ∈ T ocurre en el disco
k = k(α):
• normal unitario n := p −c ,
α α k
• tangente unitario t := ε Jn con ε ∈ {+1,−1}.
α α α α
El signo ε lo fijas para que t apunte en la direccion de recorrido de γ en α.
α α
Chequeos inmediatos (si falla, la entrada esta mal).
• Para todo α ∈ T: ∥p −c ∥ = 1.
α k(α)
• Para todo α ∈ T: ⟨n ,t ⟩ = 0 y ∥t ∥ = 1.
α α α
• Para todo {i,j} ∈ E: ∥c −c ∥ = 2.
i j
1.3. Variables de primer orden.
Variacion de centros (incognita). δc = (δc ,...,δc ) ∈ R2N con δc ∈ R2.
1 N i
Variables auxiliares por tangencia (incognita). ω = (ω ) ∈ R|T|.
α α∈T
Modelo cinematico (esto es una definicion operacional). El movimiento de cada punto de tan-
gencia se modela por δp = δc +ω t .
α k(α) α α
Comentario honesto: esta es la forma mas simple y util para convertir variacion de longitud
en una forma lineal en (δc,ω), y es la que se usa en el protocolo.
1.4. Bloque de contactos disco–disco: construccion de A(c).
Vector unitario de contacto. Para cada contacto {i,j} ∈ E define u := (c −c )/∥c −c ∥.
ij i j i j
1
2
Restricciondeprimerorden. Como∥c −c ∥ = 2semantieneconstanteenelestratodecontacto,
i j
la derivada da ⟨u ,δc −δc ⟩ = 0.
ij i j
Construccion de la fila. A(c) tiene |E| filas y 2N columnas (bloques de taman˜o 2 por disco). La
fila de {i,j} tiene:
• bloque u⊤ en las columnas del disco i,
ij
• bloque −u⊤ en las columnas del disco j,
ij
• ceros en las demas columnas.
Espacio de rodadura. Roll(c) := kerA(c).
1.5. Bloques de tangencia: construccion de T (c) y T (c).
c ω
Ecuacion por tangencia. Para cada α ∈ T imponemos ⟨t ,δc ⟩+ω = 0.
α k(α) α
Aclaracion para tu duda:
• t SI es calculable (desde p y c , mas el signo de orientacion).
α α k(α)
• δc y ω NO se conocen a priori: son las incognitas del sistema lineal.
• La ecuacion no es un dato, es una restriccion.
Fila en T (c). La fila de T (c) asociada a α tiene un unico bloque no nulo:
c c
• bloque t⊤ en las columnas del disco k(α),
α
• ceros en los otros discos.
Fila en T (c). La fila de T (c) asociada a α tiene:
ω ω
• un 1 en la columna de ω ,
α
• ceros en las demas columnas.
Conclusion. Con esta convencion T (c) = I.
ω
1.6. Operador lineal completo de restricciones: L(c).
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Definicion. L(c) es la matriz por bloques L(c) = A(c) 0 que actua sobre (δc,ω) ∈ R2N ×
Tc(c) Tω(c)
R|T|.
Significado de L(c). Las direcciones admisibles a primer orden son exactamente kerL(c) =
{(δc,ω) : L(c)(δc,ω) = 0}.
Eliminacion explicita de ω. Como T = I, la segunda linea da ω = −T (c)δc. Entonces, en este
ω c
modelo, toda δc ∈ Roll(c) tiene un lift unico a kerL(c), dado por ω = −T (c)δc.
c
Correccion importante (esto arregla un error frecuente). No es correcto escribir un teorema de
primera variacion que dependa solo de c y contactos sin usar p ,t y la descomposicion S,A.
α α
La longitud del diagrama no depende solo del grafo de contacto; depende de la geometria del
trazo γ.
1.7. Longitud del diagrama y funcional de primera variacion Φ.
Longitud. Len(γ) es la suma de longitudes de:
• segmentos s ∈ S (distancia entre extremos),
• arcos a ∈ A (longitud angular sobre ∂D , con R = 1).
k
Definicion de Φ. El funcional de primera variacion es Φ(δc,ω) := DLen(γ)[δγ(δc,ω)] evaluado
en una direccion admisible (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
Criticidad en el estrato cs significa: Φ(δc,ω) = 0 para todo (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
1.8. Contribucion de un segmento y de un arco (formulas correctas).
Segmento s : α → β.
Datos del segmento. v := p −p , ℓ := ∥v ∥, vˆ := v /ℓ .
s β α s s s s s
Primera variacion del segmento. DLen(s) = ⟨vˆ ,δp −δp ⟩.
s β α
Usando δp = δc +ω t : DLen(s) = ⟨vˆ ,δc −δc ⟩+⟨vˆ ,ω t −ω t ⟩.
α k(α) α α s k(β) k(α) s β β α α
Arco a = (α → β,k,σ ) sobre ∂D .
a k
Primera variacion del arco. En este modelo: DLen(a) = σ (ω −ω ).
a β α
3
Nota de sanidad. Esta formula NO produce un termino directo en δc antes de eliminar ω. Si
luego sustituyes ω = −T δc, entonces si aparece dependencia en δc, pero eso es despues de la
c
eliminacion.
1.9. Ensamblaje mecanico de Φ: reglas de acumulacion.
Forma general. Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω para ciertos coeficientes g ∈ R2N y g ∈ R|T|.
c ω c ω
Inicializacion. Partir con g = 0 y g = 0.
c ω
Regla por segmento s : α → β.
• En el bloque del disco k(α) sumar −vˆ a g .
s c
• En el bloque del disco k(β) sumar +vˆ a g .
s c
• Sumar −⟨vˆ ,t ⟩ a g [α].
s α ω
• Sumar +⟨vˆ ,t ⟩ a g [β].
s β ω
Regla por arco a = (α → β,k,σ ).
a
• Sumar −σ a g [α].
a ω
• Sumar +σ a g [β].
a ω
Resultado. Despues de procesar todas las piezas, Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω
1.10. Test de criticidad en algebra lineal (dos metodos equivalentes).
Metodo 1: base de kerL(c).
(1) Calcula una base de kerL(c) y juntala como columnas de una matriz K.
(2) Calcula (g ,g )⊤K.
c ω
(3) El diagrama es critico si y solo si (g ,g )⊤K = 0.
c ω
Metodo 2: criterio de espacio fila. El diagrama es critico si y solo si existe λ tal que (g ,g ) =
c ω
L(c)⊤λ. Esto es resolver un sistema lineal para λ.
Explicacion para abuela (sin perder verdad). L(c) dice que movimientos pequenos estan per-
mitidos sin romper contactos ni tangencias. Φ dice si esos movimientos pequenos hacen que la
curva se alargue o se acorte al primer orden. Critico significa: ningun movimiento permitido
cambia la longitud al primer orden.
1.11. Segunda variacion: version util para pregrado. Aqui hay una forma correcta y
ejecutable de segunda variacion, sin afirmar cosas falsas.
Idea. Primero construyes una forma cuadratica Q (δc,ω) (segunda variacion en el espacio
amb
extendido). Luego la restringes a (δc,ω) ∈ kerL(c).
Segunda variacion de un segmento. Para un segmento s : α → β con v = p −p y ℓ = ∥v ∥,
s β α s s
la segunda variacion de la distancia euclidea (formula estandar) se escribe como:
D2Len(s) = 1 ∥(I −vˆ vˆ⊤)(δp −δp )∥2 +⟨vˆ ,δ2p −δ2p ⟩.
ℓs s s β α s β α
En un protocolo de pregrado, normalmente se usa la aproximacion consistente de primer
orden: se ignora δ2p y se trabaja con la parte cuadratica positiva:
Q (δc,ω) := 1 ∥(I −vˆ vˆ⊤)(δp −δp )∥2.
s ℓs s s β α
Esto es una forma cuadratica explicita en (δc,ω) porque δp es lineal en (δc,ω).
Segunda variacion de un arco. En este modelo, DLen(a) = σ (ω −ω ) es lineal, por lo tanto
a β α
su segunda variacion en las variables (δc,ω) es cero: Q (δc,ω) = 0.
a
(cid:80)
Forma cuadratica total. Define Q (δc,ω) := Q (δc,ω).
amb s∈S s
La segunda variacion reducida sobre el estrato cs es la restriccion: Q := Q | .
red amb kerL(c)
Comentario honesto. Esta segunda variacion capta de manera limpia la curvatura de la parte de
segmentos y es suficiente para tests de estabilidad linealizados en muchos ejemplos. Si quieres
la formula completa con δ2p, hay que fijar un modelo de segundo orden del movimiento de
puntos de tangencia; eso es mas avanzado.
4
1.12. Checklist final (lo que debes mostrar al final, sin excepciones).
• Centros c ,...,c .
1 N
• Lista de contactos E y verificacion ∥c −c ∥ = 2 para {i,j} ∈ E.
i j
• Lista de tangencias T con k(α) y p y verificacion ∥p −c ∥ = 1.
α α k(α)
• Vectores n y t (con signos ε fijados).
α α α
• Matrices numericas A(c), T (c), T (c) y L(c).
c ω
• Lista de segmentos S y arcos A con signos σ .
a
• Coeficientes g ,g y la formula Φ(δc,ω) = g⊤δc+g⊤ω.
c ω c ω
• Test de criticidad por Metodo 1 o Metodo 2.

--- END OF tex.pdf ---
