IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS
JOS´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
Abstract. We study the minimum ribbonlength for immersed planar ribbon knots and links.
Our approach is to embed the space of such knots and links into a larger more tractable space
of disk diagrams. When length minimisers in disk diagram space are ribbon, then these solve
the ribbonlength problem. We also provide examples when minimisers in the space of disk
diagrams are not ribbon and state some conjectures. We compute the minimal ribbonlength
of some small knot and link diagrams and certain inﬁnite families of link diagrams. Finally we
present a bound for the number of crossings for a diagram yielding the minimum ribbonlength
of a knot or link amongst all diagrams.
1. Introduction
A ﬂat ribbon knot is an immersion of an annulus into the Euclidean plane such that the
core of the annulus corresponds to an immersed knot diagram. Flat ribbon links then are a
ﬁnite union of ﬂat ribbon knots. We require that the combinatorics of the self-intersections of
the knot or link match that of the associated immersed annulus or annuli. The ribbonlength
problem aims to ﬁnd the minimal ratio between the length of the core to the ribbon width over
all the planar realisations in a knot or link type. We normalise our ribbons so that the ribbon
width is 2 as can be done by a suitable homothety of the plane.
Kauﬀman [7] proposed a model for folded ﬂat ribbon knots whose core is piecewise linear.
He gave conjectures about the ribbonlength of the trefoil and the ﬁgure-eight knot. Currently,
results in the literature provide bounds on the ribbonlength of ﬂat folded ribbons knots for
certain families of torus knots. The ribbonlength problem remains open for general immersed
and folded ribbon knots. A good survey on ﬂat folded ribbon knots can be found in [3]. Denne,
Sullivan and Wrinkle have reported to be working on the same problem considered here [4].
A similar scenario occurs for the ropelength problem, the 3-dimensional analog of the ribbon-
length problem [2, 5, 6, 9]. Minimum ropelength is the smallest ratio between the thickness of
a tubular neighbourhood of a knot or link and its length. In this case, the unknot is minimised
by a round circle and certain chain links are minimised by linked piecewise C 2 loops [2].
In this note, we describe a method that in some cases leads to the solution of the ribbonlength
problem for ﬂat immersed ribbon knot and link diagrams, see Fig. 1. Our method ﬁnds the
tightest immersed ﬂat ribbon knot or link diagram satisfying some simple geometric constraints.
These constraints allow us to embed the space of immersed ﬂat ribbon knots and link diagrams
into a larger space of disk diagrams. The latter space has better properties and in particular,
passing to a minimum length is straightforward. Moreover, we can characterise critical points
of length in this larger space as piecewise C 2 immersions, formed by concatenations of arcs of
(unit radius) circles and straight line segments.
When a minimum length disk diagram satisﬁes the conditions for being a ribbon knot or
link, this immediately gives us the solution for the ribbonlength problem for such diagrams.
We give examples where this is the case and also where the minimum length disk diagrams are
Date: November 28, 2021.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 57M25, 57M27, 49Q10, 53C42.
Key words and phrases. Knots, links, ribbons, ribbonlength, ropelength.
1
arXiv:2005.13168v1  [math.GT]  27 May 2020

2 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
Figure 1. Examples of minimal ribbonlength knot and link diagrams. From
left to right: the trefoil, Hopf link and an element of an inﬁnite family of link
diagrams whose ribbonlength can be computed.
not ribbon. We compute the minimal ribbonlength of some small knot and link diagrams like
the unknot, trefoil, Hopf link and an inﬁnite family of link diagrams - see Figure 1.
Finally using disk diagrams, we are able to give a bound on the number of crossings in a
diagram of a given knot or link which minimises ribbonlength amongst all diagrams.
2. Immersed ribbon loops
An immersion is a C 1 map between manifolds whose Jacobian is injective everywhere. We
consider C 1 immersed loops γ : S1→ R2, where the length of the derivative ||γ′|| = 1/ℓ and
S1 = [0, 1]/{0∼ 1}, denoting the length of the loop by ℓ. We endow the space of immersed
loops with the C 1 metric. A map γ : X→ Y is considered either as a function or its image
γ(X)⊂Y when no confusion occurs.
The medial axis of an embedded planar loop is the locus of the centres of the circles of
maximal radii which are tangent to the loop and are inscribed in the compact region bounded
by the loop [14]. Note that the medial axis is contained in the focal cut locus, i.e the points in
the region bounded by the loop where either the distance function to the loop has zero Jacobian
or is not smooth. This locus consists of either focal conjugate points for the normal map to the
loop (where the normal map has a singular Jacobian) or focal cut points where there are several
equal length minimising normals to the loop. A simple example is an ellipse where the medial
axis or focal cut locus is a closed interval. The end points of this interval are focal conjugate
points and the interior points are focal cut points.
In this paper, we will use an analogous concept of medial axis for an embedded planar open
or closed arc. Note that the key diﬀerence to the case of an embedded loop is that such an
arc does not separate the plane. So we do not restrict attention to one side of the arc. In
particular, the medial axis of an arc is not necessarily connected and there can be components
associated to normals on either side of the arc. So the medial axis for an arc is the locus of
centres of maximal circles touching the arc with interiors disjoint from the arc and is contained
in the focal cut locus of the arc. The medial axis of a closed arc is necessarily closed. Note
we will combine the medial axes of a ﬁnite closed arc cover of an immersed loop, obtaining a
closed set as a result.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Given aC 1 immersionγ :S1→ R2, chooseI⊂S1 a suﬃciently small open or
closed interval such thatγ(I) is embedded. The separation bound forγ onI is the condition
that for an arbitrary point c on the medial axis of γ restricted to I,||γ(s)−c||≥ 1, for all
s∈I.

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 3
Deﬁnition 2.2. Given a C 1 immersion γ : S1→ R2, the weak separation bound is the
condition that for each point p =γ(s), there are two circles of radius 1 which touch γ atp one
on each side of γ. In other words, the circles pass through p, have a common tangent to γ atp
and locally lie on one side and the other side of γ near p.
Let T (s) and N(s), for s∈ S1, be a continuous choice of unit length tangent and normal
vectors toγ respectively atγ(s). Let LT (s) =⟨γ(s)+tT (s)⟩ andLN(s) =⟨γ(s)+tN(s)⟩ be the
tangent and normal lines passing throughγ(s). We deﬁne a continuous map Γ : S1×(−1, 1)→
R2, which is an extension of γ, by Γ( s,t ) = γ(s) + tN(s). So Γ( s, 0) = γ(s), for s∈ S1.
The notation Γ will be considered either an immersion of an open annulus or its image when
no confusion occurs, assuming that γ satisﬁes the separation bound for a collection of small
intervals coveringγ.
Proposition 2.3. Let γ : S1→ R2 be an immersed loop and I⊂ S1 be a closed interval so
thatγ(I) is embedded and γ satisﬁes the separation bound for γ onI. If I is suﬃciently small
then Γ(I× (−1, 1)) is embedded.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Γ( s,t ) = Γ(s′,t′), where (s,t )̸= (s′,t′), s,s′∈ I
and 0≤ t,t′ < 1. Firstly, we cannot have t = t′ = 0 since γ(I) is embedded. Next we cannot
havet =t′̸= 0 since this would contradict the separation bound. In fact, since I is closed, in
this case we can ﬁnd t =t′̸= 0 minimal so that Γ(s,t ) = Γ(s′,t ) is a point on the medial axis
at a distance at most t< 1 from γ.
So it remains to deal with the case that t̸=t′. Consider the smallest value of min{t,t′} for
which Γ(s,t ) = Γ(s′,t′) fors,s′∈I. (We need I closed to ﬁnd such a smallest value). Consider
the angle between the normal lines LN(s),LN(s′) at X = Γ(s,t ) = Γ(s′,t′). If the angle is zero
then s =s′ and this is impossible as the normal line is embedded. Since I is chosen as a small
closed interval, the angle between the normal lines will also be small. Now we can perturb X
to ˆX along the bisector of this angle. By continuity, we claim that we can ﬁnd (ˆs, ˆt) near (s,t )
and (ˆs′, ˆt′) near (s′,t′) so that ˆX = Γ(ˆs, ˆt) = Γ(ˆs′, ˆt′) and ˆt<t, ˆt′ <t′.
The claim follows by analysing the distance to the curve γ. Note that as I is small, ˆs, ˆs′
will be between s,s′ in I. The reason is by the weak separation bound, there are two circles
of radius one which touch γ at either of γ(s),γ (t) (see Figure ?). In particular, γ is locally
between these circles nearγ(s),γ (t) respectively. Hence if we choose an initial point X lying on
the line segment L joining these two circles and perturb it in the direction of a small angle to
this line, clearly the closest point on γ to the perturbed point will move in the same direction
away from L as the perturbation of X. Hence since we have chosen the perturbation as the
bisector of the angle between the normal lines to γ(s),γ (t), we see that ˆs, ˆs′ will be between
s,s′ in I.
But this contradicts our choice since min{ˆt, ˆt′}< min{t,t′}. So this completes the proof. □
Deﬁnition 2.4. Assume that γ is an immersed loop satisfying the separation bound for each
of a collection of closed intervals covering S1. The crossing condition is the following re-
quirements:
• γ and Γ have only double points of self-intersection. In particular, γ self-intersects in
isolated double points or double intervals (for the latter, the self-intersections are not
transverse). Also, for any isolated double point p (or double interval J) of γ, there is a
neighbourhood Up (or UJ) so that Γ−1(Up) = D1∪D2 (or Γ−1(UJ) = D1∪D2), where
D1,D 2 are disjoint open disks, see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.
• The two branches of γ cross at p or J, see Fig. 2.

4 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
• S1×(−1, 1)\Di is contractible, fori = 1, 2. Moreover S1×(−1, 1)\D hasn contractible
components, where D consists of n pre-images of neighbourhoods of all isolated double
points and double intervals for γ.
• Di∩(S1×{0}) is connected fori = 1, 2. So Up∩γ (orUJ∩γ) consists of two intersecting
open intervals.
• The pre-images of all double points of Γ come from such pairs of disks D1,D 2.
Figure 2. The broken lines are the ribbon loopγ (core) associated with the open
ribbon Γ, while the arrows show a branch ofγ. The grey areas are neighbourhoods
around self-intersections. From left to right: a ribbon self-intersecting at an
isolated double point. A ribbon self-intersecting in a double interval. A non-
crossing self-intersection at a double point. A non-crossing self-intersection in a
double interval. Finally, a self-intersection not satisfying the crossing condition
as the ribbon self-intersects but there are no associated double points or intervals
of the core.
Deﬁnition 2.5. A C 1 immersed loop γ : S1→ R2 satisfying the crossing condition and the
separation bound for a collection of closed intervals covering S1 is called a ribbon loop. The
immersed open annular neighbourhood Γ( S1× (−1, 1)) of a ribbon loop γ(S1) is called the
ribbon associated to the loop. A ﬁnite collection of C 1 loops which together satisfy these two
conditions is called a ribbon link. The space of ribbon knots and links has the standard C 1
topology.
Observation 2.6.
(1) Critical self-distance. Suppose that the normal lines LN(s),LN(t) coincide for s̸=t.
Sinceγ′(s) andγ′(t) are parallel, we have thatγ′(s)·(γ(s)−γ(t)) =γ′(t)·(γ(s)−γ(t)) =
0. This gives a double critical self-distance ∥γ(s)−γ(t)∥ between γ(s),γ (t), [9]. We
observe that a bound on medial axis distance implies a bound on double critical self-
distance between such points γ(s),γ (t).
(2) Bound on curvature . If there is a maximal radius circle with centre c which is
tangent to γ atγ(s) satisfying||γ(s)−c||< 1, then this implies that γ does not satisfy
the separation condition. This implies that the curvature κ of γ is at most 1 at all
points where a ribbon loop or link γ is C 2.
Moreover, ribbon loops or links are C 1,1 curves. To see this, note for s ﬁxed, if there
are suﬃciently close pointst∈S1 tos satisfying||γ′(s)−γ′(t)||>k|s−t|/ℓ withk >1,
then the maximal radius circle touching the loop at γ(s) has radius smaller than 1,
which again contradicts the separation condition. So this establishes that ribbon loops
are C 1,1 curves.
Finally the same argument shows thatC 1 immersed loops or links satisfying the weak
separation bound are also in the class C 1,1. This will be important when we discuss
loops in disk space.
(3) Non-overlapping condition. Two branches of the open annular neighbourhood Γ of
a ribbon loop or link γ intersect only if their core components of γ intersect, see Fig. 2.

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 5
(4) Complementary regions. A ribbon loop or link separates the plane into open com-
plementary connected domains each of whose boundary is a piecewise C 1 polygon.
Figure 3. For a double point p of γ there is a neighbourhood Up so that
Γ−1(Up) = D1∪D2, where D1,D 2 are disjoint open disks which separate the
annulus into contractible components. Note that Γ( s, 0) =γ(s), for s∈S1.
Proposition 2.7. Each complementary region of a ribbon loop or link contains an open disk
with radius 1.
Proof. Each complementary region P of a ribbon loop or link γ is a union of open domains
each of whose boundary is a piecewise C 1 polygon. Consider the ribbon Γ associated with γ.
(Recall we abuse notation by denoting mappings and images by the same symbol, when this
does not create confusion). It is clearly suﬃcient to show that P\ Γ is non empty. For if we
can ﬁnd a point c∈ P\ Γ then the open disk of radius 1 centred at c is clearly in P , since Γ
contains all points distance < 1 from γ.
Suppose by way of contradiction that P ⊂ Γ. We claim this contradicts the crossing con-
dition satisﬁed by γ. Note that the crossing condition implies that the image of the ribbon
Γ deformation retracts onto the ribbon loop or link γ, see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. In fact the
crossing condition shows that the image ribbon can be viewed as an open regular neighbour-
hood of the image loop or link. Hence there is an isomorphism between ﬁrst homology groups
H1(γ, Z)→H1(Γ, Z) induced by inclusion, where we are identifying maps with their images in
the plane. But P ﬁlls in a non-zero homologous cycle of γ, namely ∂P . So if P⊂ Γ then the
ﬁrst homology H1(Γ) would not be isomorphic to H1(γ). So this contradiction establishes the
result.
□
Observation 2.8. Proposition 2.7 does not extend to a ﬁnite collection of C 1 ribbon loops
unless they collectively satisfy the ribbon conditions.
Deﬁnition 2.9. A C 1 immersed planar loop or link is said to satisfy the double point con-
dition if it has ﬁnitely many isolated double points and double intervals.
Theorem 2.10. Ribbon loops and links satisfy the double point condition.
Proof. Clearly the double points (or intervals) of a C 0 loop form a closed set in S1. If there
are inﬁnitely many isolated double points or double intervals, then these accumulate at a
double point or double interval. But this contradicts the crossing condition satisﬁed by ribbon
loops. The explanation is the existence of disks D1,D 2 associated with double points or double
intervals (see Fig 3) implies that the connected components of the set of double points inS1 are
the individual double points and double intervals, since pairs of such points and intervals are

6 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
separated by open sets. (The closed subsets of the plane have the usual Hausdorﬀ topology).
Hence, there cannot be an accumulation point in this set. The same argument clearly applies
to a ribbon link. □
We immediately have the following.
Corollary 2.11. A ribbon loop or link partitions the plane into a ﬁnite number of open disk
regions with exactly one being unbounded.
Deﬁnition 2.12. Disk space D is the space of ﬁnite collections of C 1 immersed planar loops
satisfying the following;
• the double point condition
• the weak separation condition
• there is an open disk of radius 1 contained in each complementary region. Here comple-
mentary regions are obtained by taking the unions of complementary connected open
domains which are adjacent at non-crossing isolated double points and intervals. (See
Fig. 2 third and fourth diagrams).
Also D has the standard C 1 topology.
The elements in D are called disk diagrams. In particular, a ribbon loop or link is an element
of D.
Observation 2.13. A connected component of disk space D consists of all representations of a
ﬁnite collection of C 1 immersed planar loops, satisfying the required properties, with the same
combinatorial type of complementary regions. Here the combinatorial type of a complementary
region is deﬁned by splitting the region open along all non-crossing double points and intervals
using the resulting polygonal type. Equivalently, the loop or link can be perturbed to remove
all non-crossing double points and intervals and the resulting complementary domains have the
required combinatorial types.
Observation 2.14. Note that as complementary regions contain open disks of radius 1, they
cannot disappear under limits of sequences of loops. New non-crossing double points can
appear or disappear under limits, but by deﬁnition, these do not change the combinatorial type
of complementary regions.
3. Ribbonlength minimisers
For a ribbon loop γ : S1→ R2, we have deﬁned the ribbon map Γ : S1× (−1, 1)→ R2
whose image is also immersed, and abused notation by identifying a map with its image. We
use similar notation for ribbon links.
Deﬁnition 3.1. The combinatorial type of a ribbon loop or link is deﬁned by the collection of
complementary connected domains. Two sets of domains are equivalent if there is a bijection
between them preserving the boundary structure along the loop or link, where the corresponding
polygonal types of the open complementary connected domains are isomorphic. By boundary
structure, we mean divide the boundary into arcs bounded by vertices which are either isolated
double points or ends of double intervals.
By convention, we use representative of a given ribbon diagram to mean any ribbon diagram
with the same combinatorial type.
Deﬁnition 3.2. A ribbon diagram is cs if its core is a ﬁnite C 1 concatenation of arcs of circles
of radius 1 and line segments. The complexity of a cs ribbon diagram is the number of arcs of
circles of radius 1 plus the number of line segments.

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 7
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that γ is a ribbon diagram. Then minimal length ribbon representatives
of γ exist.
Proof. By Observation 2.6, we know that the core of a ribbon knot or link diagram is in the class
C 1,1. Therefore, we can apply the Arzela-Ascoli theorem and conclude that given a sequence
γi of ribbon representatives of γ, so that the lengths ||γi|| converge to the inﬁmum of lengths
in the class of γ, there are convergent subsequences of the γi. The limit of such a subsequence
is a loop or link ˆγ which is C 1 and realises the least length in the class of γ.
We will show that either ˆγ satisﬁes the ribbon conditions and ˆγ is a representative of γ or
this is true after a modiﬁcation of ˆ γ which does not change its length. We will denote the
subsequence converging to ˆγ byγi again. For the separation bound, note that none of the loops
or linksγi have points in their medial axes closer than distance 1 to the loops or links. But then
it is easy to deduce the same is true for ˆγ. To verify this, choose a sequence of maximal circles
touching each γi at a point xi, so that the sequence xi converges to x on ˆγ and the circles are
all on sides of γi corresponding to a given side of ˆγ at x. Then there is a subsequence of these
circles which converges to a circle touching ˆγ at x. So the radius of a maximal circle touching
ˆγ at x is at least 1 as claimed. This implies that ˆγ satisﬁes the separation bound.
For the crossing condition, we claim that double points of ˆΓ are limits of double points for Γi.
Notice that the domain and image of Γi, ˆΓ are open sets. If there are points (s,t )̸= (s′,t′) with
ˆΓ(s,t ) = ˆΓ(s′,t′) then ˆΓ(s,t ) = ˆΓ(s′,t′) = limΓi(s,t ) = limΓi(s′,t′). The image of Γ i contains
a disk of some ﬁxed radius about Γ i(s,t ) and similarly for Γi(s′,t′), by convergence of Γi to ˆΓ.
Hence for i large enough, Γi(s,t ), Γi(s′,t′) are suﬃciently close that these disks overlap and we
have double points of Γi which converge to (s,t ), (s′,t′) as claimed.
Next, we can take limits of subsequences of pairs of disks Di
1,Di
2 in the pre-image of Γ i
corresponding to an isolated double point or double interval of γi to get pairs of disks ˆD1, ˆD2
corresponding to double points or double intervals for ˆγ in the pre-image of ˆΓ, establishing that
ˆΓ also satisﬁes one of the requirements for the crossing condition. This follows using Hausdorﬀ
convergence of subsets of the plane, see [11]. However although the complements of the disks
ˆDi are contractible, this does not follow necessarily for their limits ˆD1, ˆD2 - see Fig. 4b. To ﬁx
this issue, we will need to modify ˆγ and this will be done later in the proof.
Figure 4. (a) the limit of a sequence of double points for the γi can lie in a
double interval of ˆγ. (b) two “close” double points x,x for ˆγ. (c) the tangents to
λ1,λ 2 may agree at x′. (d) a switch between the arcs λ1 and λ2.
To continue the proof of the crossing condition, we need to show the double point set S of ˆγ
inside ˆU = ˆΓ( ˆD1) = ˆΓ( ˆD2) is a single point or interval and also verify that ˆDi∩ (S1×{ 0}) is
connected for i = 1, 2. For the former, we claim that the double points of ˆγ inside ˆU are either

8 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
isolated double points or double intervals. We can suppose by passing to a subsequence that
the corresponding double points for γi inUi = Γi(Di
1) = Γi(Di
2) are a convergent set of isolated
double points or double intervals. We claim that S is either a double point or double interval
which contains the limit of the sets of double points for the γi in Ui. (Note that the limit of
a sequence of double points for the γi can lie in a double interval of ˆγ - see Fig. 4a). So the
problem is to show that S∩ ˆU is connected - it is clearly closed and contains the limit of the
sets of double points for the γi in ˆU.
Suppose that S is not connected. Since S is closed, its complement in ˆγ∩ ˆU is open. Then we
can choose two arcsλ1,λ 2 of ˆγ with common end points x,x′, where∂λ1 =∂λ2 ={x,x′} are in
diﬀerent components of S and intγi is disjoint from S fori = 1, 2. We can also assume without
loss of generality that the double point component of ˆ γ containing x, is part of the limit of
the double sets for γi. We will prove that this contradicts the assumption that ˆγ achieves the
minimum of length amongst representatives of γ if there is a non-zero angle between λ1,λ 2 at
x. See Fig. 4b.
We can choose two subarcs of γi starting at the sequence of double points xi which converge
to x as i→∞ , with the other ends x′
i,x′′
i both converging to x′. These arcs converge to the
two branches λ1,λ 2 of ˆγ. Moreover the tangents to λ1,λ 2 agree at x′, since clearly this is a
non-crossing double point of ˆγ. See Fig. 4c. The key idea is to use the Meeks-Yau exchange
and round-oﬀ trick ([10]) to get a contradiction to the assumption that the length of ˆ γ is the
inﬁmum of lengths in the class of γ. This will not only eliminate the extra self-intersection of
ˆγ but also the problem of the complement of the disks ˆDi failing to be contractible.
We modify ˆγ in two stages. See Fig. 4d. Firstly we switch the arcs λ1 andλ2. Note that the
new loop is smooth at x′ but not at x. Next we need to ‘smooth the corners’ at x created by
this exchange. The idea is to use two unit radius circles tangent to two branches of ˆγ atx as in
Fig. 5 top. We then replace parts of these branches with an arc µ,ν of each circle to produce a
newC 1 path, which is the required further modiﬁcation of ˆγ. Since radial projection onto µ,ν
reduces length, replacement of segments of the two branches of ˆγ byµ,ν decreases the length
of ˆγ. Let us denote the further modiﬁed loop by γ∗.
Figure 5. Top: Smoothing the corners at x. Bottom: An example where the
centres of the unit circles are where the boundary of the ribbon ˆΓ crosses itself.
Next we claim that no new double points are introduced inγ∗ as compared with ˆγ. It suﬃces
to show that there are no intersections of ˆγ andµ, except at the endpoints of µ. If we can show

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 9
that µ,ν are contained in ˆU then this follows. But the centres of the unit radius circles are
where the boundary of the ribbon ˆΓ crosses itself - see Fig. 5 bottom. Hence it is easy to see
that as well as µ,ν ⊂ ˆU, the ribbon Γ∗ for γ∗ is contained in ˆΓ. Moreover, the modiﬁed loop
γ∗ clearly satisﬁes that the modiﬁed disks D∗
1,D∗
2 have contractible complements - see Fig. 6.
Figure 6. A modiﬁcation of ˆγ such that the resultant loop γ∗ has disks D∗
1,D∗
2
of contractible complements.
For the ﬁnal crossing condition for γ∗, we need to show that D∗
j∩ (S1×{ 0}) is connected
for j = 1, 2. We know that Di
j∩ (S1×{ 0}) is connected for j = 1, 2 and for all i. Moreover
ˆDj is the limit of Di
j as i→∞ and ˆγ is the limit of γi as i→∞ . It is easy to see that the
modiﬁcation of ˆγ toγ∗ gives ˆDj∩ (S1×{ 0}) =D∗
j∩ (S1×{ 0}) and so we see immediately that
this is also connected. So this completes the proof that ˆγ orγ∗ satisﬁes this crossing condition.
Hence we have shown that the assumptions that the crossing condition is a single double
point or interval for ˆγ in ˆU is violated and the angle at x between the branches of ˆγ is non-zero
lead to a contradiction.
It remains to consider the case that the angle at x between the branches of ˆγ is zero. In
this case, suppose without loss of generality that ∥λ1|≤∥ λ2∥. We modify ˆγ by replacing λ2
with a copy of λ1. Hence for the modiﬁed loop, which we denote again by γ∗, the double set
now contains λ1 and the length is at most that of ˆγ. We can continue doing this if there are
further such pairs of branches of γ∗ with ends which are tangential, until no such branches
occur. This clearly gives a new loop in the same class as γ with minimum length. Moreover
for this modiﬁed loop, we see that ˆDj∩ (S1×{ 0}) = D∗
j∩ (S1×{ 0}) is connected and the
complement of Dj is contractible - see Fig. 6.
So this completes the proof of all parts of the crossing condition for γ∗ and the argument
also shows that it is in the same diagram class as γ.
□
Deﬁnition 3.4. The ribbonlength Rib(γ) of a ribbon knot or link γ is the ratio of the length
of the core γ to the width of the ribbon Γ,
Rib(γ) = Length(γ)
Width(Γ) = Length(γ)
2
4. Length minimisers in disk space
Theorem 4.1. (1) Length minimisers in disk space exist and are cs.
(2) Suppose that a length minimiser of a ribbon knot or link in disk space is ribbon. Then
this disk space minimiser is also a length minimiser in ribbon space.
Proof. By Proposition 2.7, Observation 2.8 and Theorem 2.10 all the ribbon loop diagrams or
link diagrams in a given class are contained in a component of disk space, which we will denote

10 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
by Dγ. Here we abuse notation by using γ as both a single realisation of a given ribbon loop
or link diagram or the class of such realisations.
Firstly, we need to prove that Dγ has length minimisers. Later on we will show that such
minimisers are of cs type. Firstly in disk space, loops satisfy the weak separation bound, so by
Observation 2.6 and the Arzela-Ascoli theorem, we can ﬁnd a C 1 limit ˆγ of a sequence of loops
or links γi in Dγ whose lengths converge to the inﬁmum of length. To show that ˆ γ is in Dγ,
we need to ﬁrst establish that ˆγ satisﬁes the weak separation condition. This follows by the
approach in Theorem 3.3. In particular at a sequence of points xi on γi converging to x on ˆγ,
there are two circles of radius one which touch γi atxi on either side. These circles converge to
a similar pair of circles touching ˆγ atx on each side, establishing the weak separation condition.
Note that the double points of ˆγ don’t necessarily exactly match those of γi under taking
limits. There are two ambiguities in the matchings. The ﬁrst is that isolated double points
may switch with double intervals. The second is that new non-crossing double points or double
intervals may appear in the limit ˆγ. However it is still true that the complementary regions
of ˆγ match those of members of γi under limits and there are still unit radius disks in these
regions for ˆγ, by taking limits of such disks in the corresponding regions ofγi. (Recall that non-
crossing double points and double intervals do not separate complementary regions, so having
new such points and intervals in ˆγ does not change the class of loop or link). Consequently,
this completes the proof that minimisers of length exist in Dγ.
Clearly it suﬃces to show that C 1 minimisers of length in Dγ are always of cs type, to
complete the ﬁrst part of the Theorem.
Figure 7. Left: The subarc λ does not touch the unit radius disks (in grey) in
the complementary regions for ˆγ on either side of λ. Right: We shorten λ by
replacing it by a Dubins solution of type csc (circle-line segment-circle).
The argument that a C 1 length minimiser ˆγ of Dγ is of cs type is by contradiction. We can
divide ˆγ into a ﬁnite collection of short subarcs with the following properties. Suppose ﬁrst one
of the short subarcs λ of ˆγ does not touch the unit radius disks in the complementary regions
for ˆγ on either side of λ. We can then shorten λ by replacing it by a Dubins solution (see [1]
and Fig. 7) with the same endpoints and end directions as λ if the latter is not of cs type. We
can choose the subarcs so that any such a λ is short enough relative to its distance from the
adjacent unit radius disks, so that the Dubins solution will also miss these disks.
We also need to consider subarcs λ of ˆγ with one or both ends on a unit radius disk in a
complementary region, so that the interior of λ is disjoint from any of these disks. Again if λ
is short enough and not of cs type, then we can replace it by a Dubins solution with the same
endpoints and end directions as λ so that the new arc has still has interior disjoint from these
disks. See Fig. 7 and [1]. Note that the unit disks at the ends of λ are tangential to λ.
Hence we have found a shorter loop or link in Dγ, contradicting our choice of ˆγ as shortest.
Next, by the above argument it follows that ˆ γ is a collection of Dubins solutions possibly
connecting points on the boundaries of the unit disks in the complementary regions. Moreover
at these unit disk boundary points, ˆγ must be tangent to the unit circles. To conclude that

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 11
ˆγ is cs, it remains to verify it is a ﬁnite concatenation of Dubins curves together with arcs of
unit disks joined smoothly together. If there were inﬁnitely many Dubins curves, then these
would end at inﬁnitely many points on the boundary of the unit disks. Such points would
accumulate. But if two such points are very close, it is easy to see [1] that any embedded
Dubins curve joining them is the arc of the unit circle. Hence at an accumulation point, we
would have such arcs joining up smoothly and hence do get a ﬁnite number of Dubins curves
as required, unless inﬁnitely many of these arcs had self intersections. But in the latter case, ˆγ
would have inﬁnitely many self-crossing points, which is a contradiction. So this establishes a
ribbon length minimiser is of cs type and is in Dγ.
By assumption, if the ribbon conditions of separation and crossing are satisﬁed by this disk
length minimiser, then this provides a ribbon length minimiser, since disk space contains ribbon
space. This completes the proof. □
5. V ariational approach
In this section we study critical points of length for elements in disk spaceD. Then in Section
6 we will show how the ribbonlength varies as the knot diagram changes, so long as the length
minimiser in disk space is a ribbon loop.
A useful physical model for studying critical points of length for loops inD is a ﬁnite collection
of n unit radius disks (each of these corresponds to a bounded complementary region of the
loop) and an elastic band being the loop itself. For each of the n disks, there are two degrees of
freedom, which are the coordinates of its centre. Accordingly, the conﬁguration space is a subset
of R2n. In addition, there is a distance constraint, that the centres of a pair of unit disks must
be separated by a distance of at least 2 (see also Proposition 2.7). Our approach is based on the
following proposition from the work of Kirszenblat et. al. on minimal curvature-constrained
networks [8] inspired by the work of Rubinstein and Thomas on Steiner trees [12].
Figure 8. Left: an illustration of Proposition 5.1. The other illustrations are
for Proposition 5.2.
Proposition 5.1. Suppose that p1p2p3 is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
arc of a unit circle and a line segment with common point p2 such that p1 is held ﬁxed while
p3 is varied, as shown in Fig. 8 left. Then the ﬁrst variation of length of p1p2p3 is the inner
product between the direction of variation and the unit vector from p2 to p3.
Proof. Suppose that p3 moves along any smooth curve with derivative at its initial position
being the vector v. Let ℓ denote the length of p1p2p3. The curve p1p2, of length θ, is an arc of
a unit circle whose centre c is considered the origin.
Let ˆn be the unit vector from the origin to the point p2 and x the vector from p2 top3, with
length denoted by x and unit vector in the direction of x denoted by ˆx. Observe that the ﬁrst
variation of the vector x is equal to the ﬁrst variation of its head v minus the ﬁrst variation of

12 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
its tail ˆn. If the point p3 is perturbed in the direction of v, then the ﬁrst variation of length of
p1p2p3 is
ℓ′ =θ′ +x′
= ˆn′· ˆx + x′· ˆx
= ˆn′· ˆx + (v− ˆn′)· ˆx
= v· ˆx
□
As a consequence of Proposition 5.1, we obtain the following proposition.
Proposition 5.2. Suppose that p1p2p3p4 is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
arc of a unit radius circle with centre c1 (ﬁxed), followed by a line segment, followed by an arc
of a unit radius circle with centre c2 (variable), as shown in Fig. 8. Then the ﬁrst variation
of length of p1p2p3p4 is the scalar product between the vector of variation and the unit vector
from p2 to p3.
Proof. Suppose that the centre c2 (respectively the point p4) moves along any smooth curve
with derivative at its initial position being the vector v (respectively a parallel translation of
this curve with the derivative v atp4). Let ℓ denote the length of the curve p1p2p3p4. We may
view the case where the line segment has zero length as a limiting case, see Fig. 8 right. In
this case, the points p2 and p3 coincide and we deﬁne the unit vector ˆx to be tangent to the
disks at the point p2 and pointing in the direction of motion along the curve when traveling
from the pointp1 toward the pointp4. Let m denote the midpoint of the straight segmentp2p3,
which coincides with the points p2 and p3 if the straight segment is degenerate. Let ℓ1 and ℓ2
denote the respective lengths of the curves p1p2m and mp3p4, both of which are curves as in
Proposition 5.1. Observe that the ﬁrst variation of the midpoint m is half that of the centre c2.
By proposition 5.1, if the point m is perturbed in the direction of v/2, then the ﬁrst variation
of length of p1p2m is
ℓ′
1 = 1
2v· ˆx
On the other hand, if we subtract v from all elements in Fig 8, then we see that the ﬁrst
variation of length of mp3p4 is
ℓ′
2 =− 1
2v·− ˆx
= 1
2v· ˆx
Summing these two terms, we obtain for the ﬁrst variation of length of p1p2p3p4
ℓ′ =ℓ′
1 +ℓ′
2 = v· ˆx
□
Observation 5.3. We have established that minimal length elements in disk spaceD must becs
disk diagrams, in Theorem 4.1 . To compute the ﬁrst variation of the length of acs disk diagram
(as the positions of the disks are varied) we ﬁrst decompose thecs disk diagram into curves, each
of which is a concatenation of an arc of a unit radius circle, followed by a line segment, followed
by an arc of a unit radius circle as in Proposition 5.2. Then, we simply add the contributions
coming from each piece in this decomposition. Concretely, suppose that the ith disk moves
along a smooth curve t→ c(t)∈ R2 with velocity vector v = dc
dt while the remaining disks are
held ﬁxed. Moreover, suppose that there are 2 k (possibly degenerate) straight segments lying
tangent to the ith disk with outward pointing unit vectors ˆu1, ˆu2,..., ˆu2k, see Fig. 9. Let ℓ

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 13
denote the length of the loop γ and (x2i−1,x 2i) the centre of the ith disk. Then the directional
derivativeDℓ(v) of ℓ in the direction of v at the conﬁguration point x = (x1,x 2,...,x 2n) is
given by
Dℓ(v) = lim
t→0+
ℓ(x1,x 2,...,x 2i−1 +c1(t),x 2i +c2(t),...,x 2n)−ℓ(x1,x 2,...,x 2n)
= (ˆu1 + ˆu2 +... + ˆu2k)· v.
Figure 9.
6. Examples of ribbonlength minimisers
We compute the minimal ribbonlength for some small knot and link diagrams. We discuss
the minimal ribbonlength of the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram and observe that there exists a
minimum length disk diagram that does not satisfy the separation bound. We give a conjecture
about the minimal ribbonlength for the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram. We ﬁnish this section
by providing an inﬁnite family of link diagrams whose minimal ribbonlength can be easily
computed.
6.1. The minimal ribbonlength of the unknot.
Since Length(γ) = 2π, the ribbonlength of the unknot is clearly Rib(unknot) = π for the
standard diagram γ, see Fig. 10. We will see in the next section that this is also the minimal
ribbon length over all diagrams of the unknot.
Figure 10. Left: the ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for the standard
unknot diagram. Right: the ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for the standard
unknot with one twist.
6.1.1. The twisted unknot. We compute the eﬀect of a twist on the ribbonlength of the unknot.
See Fig. 10. Without loss of generality, consider the disk diagram in Fig. 11 ( a), and ﬁx the
position of D0. We claim that D1 must touch D0 at a single point. Suppose to the contrary
that D1 does not touch D0. Let the contribution to the negative gradient of length from the
centre of D1 be denoted by u. If D0 and D1 do not touch, we can always decrease the length
of the disk diagram by perturbing the disk D1 in the direction of the negative gradient u.

14 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
In addition, since D0 and D1 belong to diﬀerent regions separated by the disk diagram, the
distance between their centres is at least 2. We conclude that D0 and D1 intersect at a single
point. It is easy to see that the minimal length disk diagram is in fact a minimal length ribbon
loop. Since the length of the minimal ribbon loop is 4 π, the ribbonlength of a twisted unknot
is 2π.
In general, a twist adds 2π to the length of a minimal disk diagram by a similar argument.
6.2. The minimal ribbonlength of the standard trefoil knot diagram.
We will prove that the disk diagram for the standard trefoil diagram in Fig. 12 left is a length
minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D0,D1,D2 andD3 as in Fig. 11 (b)-(d). Let us
ﬁx the position of the diskD0. We will show that each of the three disksD1,D2 andD3 touches
the disk D0 and a length minimising loop is connected to it by straight segments. Suppose to
the contrary that one of the three disks D1, D2 and D3, say D2, touches no other disks. In
order for the disk D2 to be in mechanical equilibrium, meaning that we cannot decrease the
length of the curve by perturbing the disk D2, the disk diagram must be as in Fig. 12 ( b).
In this case, the disk D2 is connected to the disk D0 by two straight segments and to each
of the disks D1 and D3 by one straight segment. We can decrease the length of the curve by
perturbing one of the two disks D1 andD3, say D1, in the direction of a vector v which makes
an acute angle with the negative gradient.
Next, suppose that one of the three disks D1,D2 andD3, sayD2, is prevented from touching
the disk D0 by at least one of the two disks D1 andD3, see Fig. 11 (c). In this case, we cannot
perturb the disk D1 in the direction of the negative gradient, because it will intersect the disk
D0. However, we can perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute
angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.
Finally, suppose that each of the disks D1,D2 andD3 touches the disk D0, but that at least
one of the disks D1, D2 and D3, say D2, is not connected to the disk D0 by straight segments,
see Fig. 11 ( d). In this case, we can perturb one of the disks D1 or D3 in the direction of a
vector v which makes an acute angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length
of the curve.
Observe that there is a 2-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating
two of the three disks D1,D 2 and D3 about the disk D0. To see this, observe that the contri-
bution to the negative gradient from the position of, say, the disk D1, which we denote by u,
points from the centre of the disk D1 to that of the disk D0. Since the disk D0 is held ﬁxed,
the smallest admissible angle between the vectors u and v, i.e. the perturbation vector, is π/2.
That is, the rate of change of the length of the core γ is at least zero. This is true so long as
we rotate the disk D1 about the disk D0 in some neighbourhood of the original conﬁguration.
In Fig. 11 ( h) we illustrate the other minimal crossing disk diagram for the trefoil. This
cannot be a ribbon loop since it violates, for example, the separation bound since||p0−p1||< 2.
Since Length(γ) = 12+4π, the ribbonlength of the standard trefoil knot diagram is Rib(trefoil) =
6 + 2π.
Observation 6.1. Tangential crossings do not separate disk regions . Recall that in
Deﬁnition 2.12 we allowed crossings to be tangential in disk space. Consider three simple
loops with an intersection pattern like that of three Olympic circles (a planar projection of the
Borromean rings). Note that a minimal double point representative of this diagram separates
the plane into six regions, one of which is unbounded. A tight disk diagram for the three
Olympic circles is shown in Fig. 11 ( i). Therefore the length minimiser in disk space divides
the plane into seven connected domains, two of which are separated by a tangential crossing

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 15
Figure 11. The black trace represents a disk diagram for the standard trefoil
knot diagram for (b)-(d) and for the standard Hopf link diagram for (e)-(g). The
vector u denotes a contribution to the negative gradient for the length of a disk
diagram. The centre of D1 moves along a smooth curve with derivative at its
initial position being the vector v. The illustration ( h) is a minimal crossing
trefoil disk diagram that violates the separation bound as ||p0−p1||< 2. In (i)
the green portions are part of the same region as p is a tangential (fake) crossing.
The disk D2 is obtained from Proposition 2.7, see Observation 6.1.
Figure 12. Left: A length minimising ribbon loop (core) for the standard trefoil
diagram. Right: a ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for this trefoil diagram.
denoted byp. In Fig. 11 ( i) the green portions are part of the same complementary region and
D2 is the disk obtained from Proposition 2.7.

16 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
6.3. The minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.
We will prove that the disk diagram corresponding to the standard Hopf link diagram in Fig.
13 left is a length minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D0, D1 and D2 as in Fig 11
(e)-(g). Let us ﬁx the position of the disk D0. We will show that each of the two disks D1 and
D2 touches the disk D0 and is connected to it by straight segments for a length minimising
representative. Suppose to the contrary that at least one of the two disks D1 and D2, say D1,
does not touch the disk D0. In particular, the disk D1 touches no other disks. In Fig. 11 ( e),
the contribution to the negative gradient from the position of the disk D1 is denoted by u. We
can decrease the length of the curve by perturbing the disk D1 in the direction of the negative
gradient. Similarly, if the two disks D1 and D2 touch one another but do not touch the disk
D0, then we can perturb the two disks D1 and D2 collectively in the direction of the negative
gradient.
Next, suppose that one of the two disks D1 andD2, sayD1, serves as an obstacle preventing
the disk D2 from touching the disk D0, see Fig.11 (f). Let u denote the contribution to the
negative gradient from the position of the disk D1. In this case, we cannot perturb the disk
D1 in the direction of the negative gradient, because it touches the disk D0. However, we can
perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle with the vector
u. In this way, we can decrease the length of the curve.
Finally, suppose that both of the disks D1 andD2 touch the disk D0, but that neither of the
two disksD1 andD2 is connected to the disk D0 by straight segments, see Fig. 11 (g). In this
case, we can perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle
with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.
Since Length(γ) = 8+4π, the ribbonlength of the standard Hopf link diagram is Rib(Hopf link) =
4 + 2π.
Figure 13. Left: A length minimising ribbon loop (core) for the standard Hopf
link diagram. Note that there is a 1-parameter family of minimisers (up to
isometries) that is obtained by rotating D1 or D2 about the disk D0. Right: the
ribbon link of minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.
6.4. On the ribbonlength of the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram.
Regarding the disk diagram for the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram, there is a simple ar-
gument to show that the conﬁguration depicted in Fig. 14 left, where the centres of the
disks D0,D 1,D 2,D 3 and D4 are positioned at the points (0 , 0), (−
√
3,−1), (0,−2), (
√
3,−1)
and (0, 2), respectively, gives a minimum length element in disk space D. To see this, observe
that we can decompose the core γ into three loops γ1,γ 2 andγ3 as in Fig. 14. By a variational
argument similar to those given above, it is clear that the respective lengths of the loops γ1,γ 2
and γ3 must be at least 2π, 4 + 2π and 8 +π due to the number of disks contained inside each
of the three loops. Since the conﬁguration depicted in Fig. 14 left attains all three bounds, it

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 17
gives a minimum length element in disk space D for disk diagrams of the combinatorial type of
the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram. The corresponding ribbon is illustrated in Fig. 15. Note
there is a 1-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating the disk D4
about the disk D0.
+ =
 +
Figure 14. A decomposition of a minimal disk diagram for the standard ﬁgure-8
knot diagram.
Observation 6.2. The previous example of a minimiser in D for disk diagrams with the com-
binatorial type of the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram violates the non-overlapping condition.
This conﬁguration of disks does not lead to a ribbon knot diagram since the associated ribbon
loop violates the separation condition ||p0−p1|| < 2, and consequently, the ribbon violates
the non-overlapping condition, see Fig. 15. Observe that one segment of the ribbon overlaps
another in a coloured wedge in Fig. 15 (left), even though the corresponding core components
do not intersect one another. A third ribbon segment lies above one of the two segments and
beneath the other. The non-overlapping condition places an additional constraint on the disk
diagram required for it to be ribbon.
A conjectured minimiser that satisﬁes the non-overlapping condition is depicted in Fig. 15
at right, where the centres of the disks D0,D 1,D 2,D 3 and D4 are positioned at the points
(0, 0), (−
√
2,−
√
2), (0,−2
√
2), (
√
2,−
√
2) and (0, 2), respectively.
6.5. Minimal length for the standard Whitehead link diagram in disk space.
In the case of the standard Whitehead link diagram, we may apply a similar decomposition
argument but we again run into the non-overlapping condition. That is, we can decompose the
coreγ into three loops, two of which contain two disks and one of which contains four disks. By
a variational argument, it is easy to see that the respective lengths of the loops must be at least
4 + 2π, 4 + 2π and 8 + 2π due to the number of disks contained inside each of the three loops.
Since the conﬁguration depicted in Fig. 12 left attains all three bounds, it gives a minimum
length element in disk space D for disk diagrams of the combinatorial type of the standard
Whitehead link diagram. The corresponding ribbon is illustrated in Fig. 12. Note there is a
2-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating the disk D1 about the
disk D0 and the disk D3 about the disk D2. Since Length(γ) = 16 + 6π, the minimium length
of the standard Whitehead link diagram in disk space is Rib(Whitehead link) = 8 + 3 π.
6.6. Minimal length in disk space for diagram family 1.
Each member of the inﬁnite family of link diagrams F1, an example of which is depicted in
Fig. 17, comprises n Whitehead links concatenated via nugatory crossings. For this choice of

18 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
Figure 15. From left to right: a length minimising disk diagram in D with the
combinatorial type of the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram. The ribbon associated
with the core is at the left. The coloured wedge illustrates an overlap between
two branches of the ribbon. A conjectured length minimising ribbon loop for
the standard ﬁgure-8 knot diagram on the right. The conjectured ribbon knot
associated with the ribbon loop on the right.
Figure 16. Left: A length minimising core for the standard Whitehead link dia-
gram in disk space. Right: the corresponding ribbon for the standard Whitehead
link diagram, violating the non-overlapping condition.
knot diagram as in Fig. 17, we show via a decomposition argument that the minimum length
of the family F1 of link diagrams in disk space is
Rib(F1) = Rib(Whitehead link)×n = (8 + 3π)n.
To see this, observe that the core can be decomposed into 2n loops, each of which contains two
disks, in addition to n loops, each of which contains four disks. By a variational argument, a
loop containing two disks must be of length at least 4 + 2 π, whereas a loop containing four
disks must be of length at least 8 + 2 π. Since the geometric realisation of the link diagram
depicted in the Fig. 17 attains the above bounds, it must give a minimum for the length of
this particular diagram in disk space.
6.7. Minimal ribbonlength for diagram family 2.
Each member of the inﬁnite family of link diagrams F2, an example of which is depicted in
Fig. 18, comprises n Hopf links concatenated via nugatory crossings. Observe that the core

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 19
Figure 17. Here the core does not satisfy the separation bound. So the ribbon
is overlapping and this only gives the minimum length in disk space and is not a
ribbon link diagram
can be decomposed into 2n loops, each of which contains two disks. By following a pattern of
argument similar to that provided for the previous example, it is easy to see that the minimum
length of the family of link diagrams F2 amongst all disk diagrams is
Rib(F1) = Rib(Hopf link)×n = (4 + 2π)n.
Figure 18. Here the core obeys the separation bound, so the ribbon satisﬁes
the non-overlapping condition. So this gives the minimum ribbon length diagrams

20 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
7. Bounding the crossing number of minimal length knot and link ribbon and
disk diagrams
In this section, the aim is to give a useful bound on the crossing number of a projection of
a knot or link which minimises ribbonlength amongst ribbon diagrams or length amongst disk
diagrams. In this way, if the procedures of the previous sections could be made more eﬃcient,
then a practical method would follow for computing minimum ribbon length amongst all ribbon
diagrams of a given knot or link, or the minimum length amongst all disk diagrams of a ﬁxed
knot or link. These both give (geometrical) invariants of knots and links, but the diﬃculty is
to have a practical process for computing these minimum lengths. To illustrate the theory, we
bound the crossing numbers for the trefoil knot and the Hopf link. But only for the trefoil knot,
is the bound strong enough to immediately conclude that the minimum ribbon length can be
computed over all diagrams. For the Hopf link, all diagrams with at most 4 crossings need to
be examined.
Theorem 7.1. Suppose that K is a knot or link in R3 and γ is a ribbon (respectively disk)
planar projection with length ℓ. Then a planar projection of K which minimises ribbon length
(respectively length) amongst all ribbon diagrams (respectively disk diagrams) has at most
[ℓ
π− 1
2
(√
(1 + 4ℓ
π )− 1
)
]
crossings.
Proof. Suppose a planar projection γ∗ is ribbon (respectively disk) with c transverse crossings
and with minimum length amongst all ribbon (respectively disk) diagrams. Note we will slightly
perturb any planar diagram to only have transverse crossings, eliminating any non-transverse
crossings and replacing a crossing consisting of an interval of double points by a single transverse
point or the empty set. See Figure 2, where the crossings in the right ﬁgures three and four
get eliminated. Then γ∗ forms a graph G withc vertices of degree 4 and hence 2c edges joining
the vertices.
Since the Euler characteristic of the plane is one, we see that γ∗ must have c + 1 bounded
complementary regions. Now by Proposition 2.7 if γ∗ is a ribbon projection, then each bounded
complementary region contains a unit disk, i.e the projection is a disk diagram. Hence each of
the bounded complementary regions has area at least at leastπ. By the isoperimetric inequality,
each bounded complementary region has boundary length at least 2 π. Adding up the lengths
of the boundaries of the bounded complementary regions gives at least 2( c + 1)π.
Let us denote by ∂G the subgraph of G consisting of edges which are in the boundary of
a single bounded complementary region of γ. The edges of ˆG = G\ ∂G will be referred
to as internal edges of G and clearly are in the boundary of two bounded complementary
regions of γ. Hence the sum of the lengths of the boundaries of the bounded complementary
regions is∥∂G∥ + 2∥ ˆG∥. Combining, we get 2 ℓ = 2∥γ∥≥ 2∥γ∗∥ = 2∥G∥ = 2∥∂G∥ + 2∥ ˆG∥≥
2(c + 1)π +∥∂G∥.
Next, we know that the area enclosed by ∂G is at least ( c + 1)π. By another application
of the isoperimetric inequality, this implies ∥∂G∥≥ 2
√
(c + 1)π. Putting this together with
the inequality above, we get 2 ℓ≥ 2(c + 1)π + 2
√
(c + 1)π. This can be rewritten as ℓ
π ≥
c + 1 +
√
(c + 1). Now this quadratic inequality is easily solved giving the ﬁnal result c≤
ℓ
π− 1
2
(√
(1 + 4ℓ
π )− 1
)
.
□

IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS 21
Example 7.2. For the standard projection of the trefoil knot, we found in 6.2 that the minimum
ribbon length is 6 + 2π. So putting twice this length into Theorem 7.1
c≤ 12 + 4π
π − 1
2
(√
1 + 4(12 + 4π)
π − 1
)
≈ 5.47
So to verify that the minimum ribbon length is that of the standard projection, it suﬃces to
check diagrams of the trefoil with at most 5 crossings.
Example 7.3. For the standard projection of the Hopf link, we found in 6.3 that the minimum
ribbon length is 4 + 2π. So putting twice this length into Theorem 7.1 gives
c≤ 8 + 4π
π − 1
2
(√
1 + 4(8 + 4π)
π − 1
)
≈ 4.43
So to verify that the minimum ribbon length is that of the standard projection, it suﬃces
to check diagrams of the Hopf links with at most 4 crossings. The standard diagram has 2
crossings.
8. Discussion
There are three diﬀerent classes of planar knot and link diagrams considered in this paper.
The ﬁrst class are ribbon knots and links which satisfy the separation bound and crossing
condition. The second are diagrams which lie in disk space, i.e there is a unit disk in each
complementary bounded region. Finally, a link which is a ﬁnite collection of ribbon knot
diagrams gives a weaker condition than for ribbon links. So this gives a third class of diagrams.
However, to obtain the crucial Proposition 2.7 it is clear that the weaker property of a link
being a ﬁnite union of ribbon knots is not suﬃcient. Hence we cannot embed our problem into
disk space using this weaker property. The advantage of using disk space is Theorem 4.1. This
result shows that if a disk space length minimiser is ribbon, then this diagram is a concatenation
of arcs of circles of radius one and straight line segments.
Note also that the proof of Proposition 2.7 uses an important property of ribbon knots and
links, namely that the ribbon deformation retracts onto the core of the knot or link. This latter
property is implied by the crossing condition. In fact, we chose the crossing condition with this
property in mind.
In work in progress, the ﬁrst and third authors will introduce a new mathematical model
of physical knots and links. The current paper is related to this project in that we have tried
to produce a model of ribbon knots and links in the plane with similar properties to the 3-
dimensional model, which is harder to solve. However, two nice features of the 3-dimensional
model are that ‘ropelength’ minimisers always exist and have good regularity properties for
any knot or link type. Moreover for the Sussmann problem, see [13], namely ﬁnding a shortest
length path between two nearby points with initial and ﬁnal directions not diﬀering too much,
in our 3-dimensional model the solution is a concatenation of arcs of circles of radius one and
straight line segments. However we are not able to compute length minimisers for any knots
and links, except for the unknot.
Next, the bound obtained in Theorem 7.1 is most likely not optimal. It would be interesting
to reﬁne the bound, using more properties of ribbon and disk space length minimisers. The
proof of Theorem 7.1 only uses the isoperimetric inequality. By bringing the bound closer to
the minimum crossing number, e.g for alternating knots and links, this would give a much more
eﬃcient approach to computing the minimum ribbon and disk length over all planar diagrams.

22 JOS ´E AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN
References
[1] J. Ayala, D. Kirszenblat, J.H. Rubinstein, A geometric approach to shortest bounded curvature paths,
Communications in Analysis and Geometry, 26, (4), (2018), 679–697.
[2] J. Cantarella, R.B. Kusner, J.M. Sullivan, On the minimum ropelength of knots and links, Invent. Math.
150 (2002) 257–286.
[3] E. Denne, Folded ribbon knots in the plane, arXiv:1807.00691v1.
[4] E. Denne, J. M. Sullivan and N. C. Wrinkle, The ribbonlength of knot diagrams, Preliminary report 1132-
54-316, https://www.ams.org/amsmtgs/2240_abstracts/1132-54-316.pdf
[5] Y. Diao, C. Ernst, and E. J. Janse van Rensburg, Thickness of knots, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 126,
(1999), 293–310.
[6] O. Gonzalez, J.H. Maddocks, Global curvature, thickness, and the ideal shapes of knots. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. (USA) 96, (1999), 4769–4773.
[7] L.H. Kauﬀman, Minimal ﬂat knotted ribbons, Physical and numerical models in knot theory, Singapore,
World Sci. Publ. (2005), Vol 36 Ser. Knots Everything, 495–506.
[8] D. Kirszenblat and K. G. Sirinanda, M. Brazil, P. A. Grossman, J. H. Rubinstein and D. A. Thomas,
Minimal curvature-constrained networks, J. Global Optimization 72 (2018), 71–87.
[9] R.A. Litherland, J. Simon, O. Durumeric, E. Rawdon, Thickness of Knots, Topology and its Applications
91, (1999), 233–244.
[10] W. Meeks and S.T. Yau, Topology of three dimensional manifolds and the embedding problems in minimal
surface theory. Annals of Mathematics. 112 (3): (1982), 441–484.
[11] J. Munkres, Topology (2nd ed.) Prentice Hall.,(1999) pp. 280–281.
[12] J. H. Rubinstein, D. A. Thomas, A variational approach to the Steiner ratio conjecture, 33, Ann Oper Res
(1991) 481–499. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02071984
[13] H. Sussmann, Shortest 3-dimensional paths with a prescribed curvature bound, Proceedings of the 34th
IEEE conference on Decision and Control, 1995,
[14] L. Younes. Shapes and Diﬀeomorphisms. Springer, 2010.
F acultad de Ciencias, Universidad Arturo Prat, Iquique, Chile
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia
E-mail address : jayalhoff@gmail.com
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia
E-mail address : d.kirszenblat@student.unimelb.edu.au
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia
E-mail address : joachim@unimelb.edu.au

